Valencia Course Offerings
Valencia College course offerings and descriptions are
grouped under the applicable department heading. Within the
alphabetized department headings, courses are listed alphabetically
by subject prefix.
A prerequisite is a course which must be completed satisfactorily
before a higher-level related course can be taken. A corequisite
is a course which must be taken at the same time as another course.
Prerequisites and corequisites are denoted within each course
description. At the time of registration in a course, all students, except
transient students with official documentation, are subject to the
current course corequisites and prerequisites, some of which require
minimum entry test scores.
Valencia awards semester credits. The following is a guide to the
abbreviations at the top of the pages with course descriptions. There
may be exceptions to these guidelines.
College-Level and Developmental Credits
Cr Credits per term
Cls Class hours per week (full term)
Lab Lab hours per week (full term)
Vocational Credits:
Con Contact hours per course
The following is a guide to the letters attached to the end of course
numbers:
C represents a combined classroom and
laboratory experience
H represents the Honors version of a course
L represents a laboratory experience
N represents a supplemental tutorial
A course may have the designation of “multiple credit course” in the
course description. This means that the course can be repeated for
credit; a repeat will not count as an attempt for full cost of instruction
or for withdrawal; and grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Not all courses are offered in all terms or at all campuses. For current
offerings, consult the listing of credit courses available prior to
registration each term at valenciacollege.edu/students/courses.asp.
When a course is added to Valencia’s curriculum, it must be assigned a
course number by the Statewide Course Numbering System. Until the
course number is assigned, Valencia uses a temporary designator
composed of an “N” followed by three digits; e.g., N004.
At times, the course number for a particular course has to be changed.
When this occurs and the content of the course is determined to be
the same, the two course numbers represent equivalent courses. In the
course descriptions that follow, numbers for former equivalent courses
are provided for the majority of courses for which there is a former
equivalent.
The preceding pages include a listing of the majority of former courses
that have current equivalencies.
Accounting
ACG 2021 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING
• Prerequisite: An assessment score for placement in
MAT 0024C or higher mathematics or a minimum grade
of C in MAT 0012C or in APA 1111 or in MTB 1103
Accounting concepts, principles, procedures and underlying theories
applicable to nature of accounting, financial statements, accounting
cycle, current assets, plant and equipment, long-term investments,
intangible assets, payroll, current liabilities, long-term debt, and
owner's equity including accounting for sole proprietorships,
partnerships, and corporations. (Special Fee: $30.00)
ACG 2071 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING
• Prerequisite: ACG 2021
Accounting for business information requirements with cost
accounting concepts and relationships, statement of cash flows,
financial statement analysis, cost-volume-profit analysis, variance
analysis, budgeting, pricing decisions, capital expenditure decisions,
and management accounting analysis for decision-making.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
ACG 2100 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING I
• Prerequisite: ACG 2071
Overview of accounting and its theoretical foundations, including
recognition, measurement, and reporting of income and assets.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
ACG 2110 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING II
• Prerequisite: ACG 2100
Overview of accounting and its theoretical foundations, including
recognition, measurement and reporting of liabilities and owner's
equity, special problems in determination and reporting of income on
financial statements. (Special Fee: $30.00)
ACG 2360 3 3 0
COST ACCOUNTING
• Prerequisite: ACG 2071
Accounting principles and procedures used in analysis and control of
cost for manufacturing and service businesses. Topics include
preparation of statements and schedules, analysis of costs, selling,
general and administrative expenses, and variances.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
ACG 2450 3 3 0
COMPUTER ACCOUNTING I
• Prerequisite: APA 1111 or ACG 2021
Introduction to use of computers to process and organize accounting
information. Includes analysis of transactions, data entry, and
preparation and analysis of computer-generated financial statements
and reports. (Special Fee: $30.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab
Accounting
224
ACG 2460 3 3 0
COMPUTER ACCOUNTING II - SPREADSHEETS
• Prerequisite: ACG 2021 or APA 1111 or MTB 1103 or department
approval
Introduction to use of spreadsheets in accounting. Students use
spreadsheets to complete accounting cycle, prepare financial
statements and reports, and perform financial analysis.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
APA 1111 3 3 0
BASIC ACCOUNTING
Instruction and practice in fundamentals of financial record keeping
and reporting. Accounting tasks will be performed by hand and using
appropriate software. Topics include completing the accounting cycle,
controls over cash, and accounting for payroll. (Special Fee: $30.00)
APA 2934 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ACCOUNTING
For students interested in discussion, exploration and observation of
special topics in accounting. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each
time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $30.00)
APA 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN ACCOUNTING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ACG 2021. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
APA 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN ACCOUNTING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including APA 1111 and ACG 2021. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override approval
as it relates to the waiver of required program/discipline-related
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
TAX 2000 3 3 0
FEDERAL INCOME TAX
• Prerequisite: ACG 2021
Fundamental regulations covering federal income tax applicable to
individuals. Includes computation of tax, preparation of forms and tax
planning. (Special Fee: $30.00)
Anthropology
ANT 2000 3 3 0
INTRODUCTORY ANTHROPOLOGY
Introduction to study of humans and culture with an emphasis on
archaeology, biological anthropology, and linguistics. Major topics
include human origins, religion and supernatural beliefs, family and
kinship, technology, medical and forensic anthropology, foodways, and
globalization.
ANT 2140 3 3 0
INTRODUCTORY ARCHAEOLOGY
Introduction to the concepts and methods archaeologists use to study
human culture from the world’s earliest societies to the present.
ANT 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ANTHROPOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in anthropology based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
ANT 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN ANTHROPOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses in
reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic Purposes.
A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12 credits,
including ANT 2000. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiencess to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship fee: $10.00)
Architecture
ARC 1201 3 3 0
THEORY OF ARCHITECTURE
This course explores cultural and philosophical considerations that
affect current practices in the design of the built environment, with
emphasis on how these issues impact the quality of life. Works and
writings of architects past and present will be studied, providing a
unifying thread connecting various topics throughout the course.
When available, guest speakers will present special topics.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Accounting Architecture
225
ARC 1301 4 3 2
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN I
• Prerequisite: Student’s official Valencia record must indicate
A.A. Pre-Major: Architecture as the declared major
This course is an introduction to the fundamentals of two- and threedimensional
design, principles of architectonics, and basic
architectural design. Model making, drawing and rendering techniques
will be applied to projects that explore the conceptualization and
communication of design ideas. (Special Fee: $31.00)
ARC 1302 4 3 2
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN II
• Prerequisite: ARC 1301
• Prerequisite or corequisite: ARC 1201
This course is a focused study of two-dimensional design, including the
primary elements of line, shape, color, value, balance, pattern, texture
and rhythm. Assigned projects will explore the application of space,
scale and proportion in basic architectural design, using a variety of
media and materials. (Special Fee: $31.00)
ARC 1701 3 3 0
HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE I
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
This introductory course provides a general survey of cultural,
aesthetic, and socio-political influences which have affected and
shaped architecture from pre-historic times through the end of the
seventeenth century. Gordon Rule course in which the student is
required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple
assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon
Rule requirement.
ARC 2180 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL ARCHITECTURE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ARC 1302 or department
approval
This course will provide another media for students to convey their
architectural work and their space-making skills. This media will be
one of the design vehicles for exploration, experimentation and, most
importantly, representation. It is anticipated that this course will work
in conjunction with the design studios to allow students to implement
these digital techniques. Also, the various 2D and 3D digital interfaces
introduced will be of industry standard, which will allow for a sense of
preparation for the current methods and practices for professional
growth. (Special Fee: $38.00)
ARC 2303 5 3 2
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN III
• Prerequisite: ARC 1302
A focused study of three-dimensional design, including the principles
of architectonics and communication of design ideas. Model making,
drawing and rendering techniques will be applied to projects that
explore conceptualization and material usage. Issues of human use in
relationship to program and function are considered in detail. Projects
vary, but often address residential or institutional programs and
involve the integration of form, massing, structure, circulation, light
and context. (Special Fee: $30.00)
ARC 2304 5 3 2
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN IV
• Prerequisite: ARC 2303
This course addresses the issues of functional relationships, spatial
composition and site constraints, as well as selection and detailing of
building materials. A sequence of design exercises and projects with a
high degree of complexity will explore the three-dimensional nature of
architectural forms and spaces. Models are primary in this studio, with
drawing exercises supplementing each project to develop, refine, and
communicate design ideas. (Special Fee: $30.00)
ARC 2461 4 4 0
MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION
Broad introduction to the methods and materials used in the
construction of the build environment and to building technologies as
they influence both architectural design and construction.
ARC 2501 4 4 0
ARCHITECTURAL STRUCTURES I
• Prerequisites: ARC 2303; and MAC 2233 or MAC 2311; and
PHY 1053C
This course covers principles of statics and strengths of materials;
structural mechanics and the effects of loads and loading on building
elements and frames. Topics include stress and deformation,
properties of sections, gravity loads, shear and bending in beams, and
stresses in columns, with focus on analysis and design of wood
structural systems.
ARC 2702 3 3 0
HISTORY OF ARCHITECTURE II
• Prerequisite: ARC 1701
This introductory course provides a general survey of the cultural,
aesthetic and socio-political influences which have affected and
shaped architecture from the beginning of the eighteenth century to
the present.
Art
ART 1201C 3 3 3
DESIGN I
Introduction to studio art through analytical use of elements and
principles of two-dimensional design and color theory.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 1203C 3 3 3
DESIGN II
• Prerequisite: ART 1201C
Continuation of ART 1201C through study of visual elements and
principles and their application in three-dimensional form and color
theory. (Special Fee: $21.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Architecture Art
226
ART 1300C 3 3 3
DRAWING I
(Was ART 1301C in 1977-78 through 2001-02)
Introduction to basic skills, concepts, methods, and tools. Emphasis on
increasing powers of visual observation and drawing from life.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 1301C (Formerly ART 1376C, ART 1302C) 3 3 3
DRAWING II
• Prerequisite: ART 1300C
Continuation of ART 1300C with emphasis on further development of
technique and articulation of space, volume, mass, tonal value, and
composition. (Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 2330C 3 2 4
LIFE DRAWING
• Prerequisite: ART 1300C or department approval
Working from live models, students learn to draw the human form.
Includes instruction in skeletal structure, musculature, movement, and
placement in space. (Special Fee: $54.00)
ART 2400C 3 3 3
PRINTMAKING I
Basic mastery of graphic techniques of intaglio and/or relief
printmaking. Consists of studio work, demonstrations of each
technique to be mastered and selected studies of history of
printmaking. (Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 2401C 3 3 3
PRINTMAKING II
• Prerequisite: ART 2400C or department approval
Consists of experimental approach to individual expression with
emphasis on imagery, content and refinement of techniques of
printmaking. (Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 2500C (Formerly ART 2510C) 3 3 3
PAINTING I
• Prerequisites: ART 1201C and ART 1300C or department
approval
Introduction to basic concepts and techniques of painting. Emphasis
on color mixing, exploration of form and illusionistic space through
observation. (Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 2501C (Formerly ART 2520C) 3 3 3
PAINTING II
• Prerequisite: ART 2500C
Painting basics are reviewed through continued exploration into
technique, color and composition. Prepares student for more advanced
painting through a series of more elaborate and long-term projects.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
ART 2701C 3 3 3
SCULPTURE I
Experiences with variety of three-dimensional media such as wood,
metal (cast and fabricated), clay and plastics, designed to introduce
student to handling of materials and tools necessary to understand
arrangement and relationship of three-dimensional forms.
(Special Fee: $55.00)
ART 2750C (Formerly ART 2110C) 3 3 3
CERAMICS I
Introductory course in pottery design: hand-building techniques,
glazing and firing. (Special Fee: $35.00)
ART 2751C (Formerly ART 2111C) 3 3 3
CERAMICS II
• Prerequisite: ART 2750C
Continuation of ART 2750C with emphasis on wheel throwing,
advanced glaze formulation, kiln loading and firing.
(Special Fee: $35.00)
ART 2930C (Formerly ART 2802C) 1 - 6 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ART
Seminars for students interested in further study in specific art area.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 12 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
ART 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN ART AND FINE ARTS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including one of the following Studio Art classes (ART
1201C, ART 1300C, ART 2400C, ART 2500C, ART 2701C, ART
2750C). The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Art History
ARH 1000 (Formerly ARH 1009) 3 3 0
THE VISUAL ARTS TODAY
Introductory art appreciation course designed to provide student with
foundation for understanding contemporary visual arts.
ARH 2050 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO ART HISTORY I
Survey of development of visual art forms from prehistory through
Middle Ages.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Art Art History
227
ARH 2051 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO ART HISTORY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Survey of development of visual arts from Renaissance to present.
Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to demonstrate
college-level writing skills through multiple assignments. Minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
ARH 2051H 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO ART HISTORY II - HONORS
Same as ARH 2051. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
ARH 2500 3 3 0
NON-WESTERN ART HISTORY
Survey of development of visual art forms in non-western cultures
including: African, Chinese, Indian, Japanese, Mesoamerican, Native
American, Oceania, and South American.
ARH 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ART
Selected topics in art based on the needs and areas of interest of the
class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as part
of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of
3 credits, provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
Astronomy
AST 1002 3 3 0
ASTRONOMY
Introductory survey of astronomical universe. Includes study of the
earth as astronomical body, solar systems, stars, galaxies and
cosmological theories of universe in general. Much emphasis on
unprecedented growth of knowledge in astronomy during past decade.
AST 1002H 3 3 0
ASTRONOMY - HONORS
Same as AST 1002. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
AST 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ASTRONOMY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in astronomy based on the needs and areas of interest
of the class and professor. May include planetarium and/or observing
activities as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit for a maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Baking and Pastry Management
See Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Management, Culinary
Management, and Restaurant Management for course descriptions.
Biology
BOT 2010C 4 3 3
BOTANY
• Prerequisite: BSC 1010C or department approval
Study of structural organization, classification, physiology,
reproduction, heredity and evolution of plants. Includes survey of
plant kingdom and comparison of various plant groups.
(Special Fee: $35.00)
BOT 2800 3 3 0
ETHNOBOTANY
The course will emphasize the role of plants in the development of
civilization and the influence of plants on world history, politics,
economics and culture. A survey of useful and harmful plants and
plant products from various cultures from around the world will be
explored.
BOT 2932 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN BOTANY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in botany based on the needs and areas of interest of
the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as
part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for
a maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
BSC 1005 3 3 0
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE
An introduction to essential principles of biological science. Topics
include, but are not limited to, the nature of science and the scientific
method, chemistry for biology, cell structure, metabolism,
reproduction and genetics, organisms and ecology. This is a general
education course for non-biology majors. It is also recommended for
students who need preparation before enrolling in a biology course for
Science majors.
BSC 1005L 1 0 3
LAB IN APPLIED BIOLOGY
Biology laboratory course that will satisfy the General Education
Requirement for a laboratory science at many universities and may be
taken concurrently with, or independently of, BSC 1005.
(Special Fee: $49.00)
BSC 1005C 4 3 3
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE COMBINED
Same as BSC 1005 and BSC 1005L with class and lab combined.
(Special Fee: $49.00)
BSC 1005H 4 3 3
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE HONORS
Same as BSC 1005. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
(Special Fee: $49.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Art History Biology
228
BSC 1010C 4 3 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF BIOLOGY I
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes
Introduction to fundamental biological principles emphasizing
common attributes of all living organisms. Unifying concepts include
chemical structure of living matter, structure and function of the cell,
specialized cells, major metabolic functions, control systems,
reproduction, genetics, evolution and ecology. Prerequisite for
advanced biology courses. (Special Fee: $49.00)
BSC 1010H 4 3 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF BIOLOGY I - HONORS
Same as BSC 1010C. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
(Special Fee: $49.00)
BSC 1011C 4 3 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF BIOLOGY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in BSC 1010C or BSC 1010H
A continuation of BSC 1010C. Includes an analysis of biological systems
at the organismal and supraorganismal levels: Unity and diversity of
life, organismal structure and function. Will examine such topics as:
Darwinism, origin of life, diversity and origin of Eukaryotes, evolution
and diversity of the five kingdoms; animal and plant morphology,
reproduction, development of animal behavior, population biology and
ecology. (Special Fee: $58.00)
BSC 1011H 4 3 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF BIOLOGY II-HONORS
Same as BSC 1011C. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
(Special Fee: $58.00)
BSC 1020 3 3 0
HUMAN BIOLOGY
A general education non-laboratory course for students not majoring
in biology. Includes study of the human body with an emphasis on
major organ systems and processes and their links to biological
concepts underlying major societal and bioethical issues.
BSC 1020C 4 3 3
HUMAN BIOLOGY COMBINED
A general education course for students not majoring in biology that is
fully integrated with a laboratory that emphasizes active learning
strategies. Includes study of scientific method and study of human
biology with an emphasis on major organ systems and processes,
human development, genetics, diseases, biochemical processes and
their relation to the human body, and biological concepts underlying
major societal and bioethical issues. (Special Fee: $53.00)
BSC 1026 3 3 0
BIOLOGY OF HUMAN SEXUALITY
General non-laboratory course designed to introduce students to
various biological aspects of human sexuality, including sexual
genetics and sex determination, sexual anatomy, physiology and
development, processes of fertilization, pregnancy, birth control,
sexually transmitted diseases, menstruation, menopause and aging.
Other appropriate areas may be discussed when time permits.
BSC 1026H 3 3 0
BIOLOGY OF HUMAN SEXUALITY-HONORS
Same as BSC 1026. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
BSC1050 3 3 0
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE
General education non-laboratory course provides understanding of
our interdependence with and responsibility for environment.
Investigates such aspects of environment as pollution, urbanization,
population trends and changes in lifestyles. Treats present and
projected solutions to problems.
BSC1050H 3 3 0
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE-HONORS
Same as BSC 1050. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
BSC 1061 3 3 0
CENTRAL FLORIDA HABITATS
This active learning elective science course teaches students to
recognize the common habitats of Central Florida through
identification of typical plants, plant species composition, soil and
topography. Supporting topics are natural fire cycles, fire-mediated
succession and prescribed burning, nature of watersheds, causes and
effects of flooding, invasive exotic plants and animals, and
conservation land acquisition and management. A three-hour canoe
trip allows study of the floodplain swamp habitat. Field work will vary
with weather conditions, with some indoor class work included. This
course will not be considered for science general education credit.
BSC 1084 3 3 0
ESSENTIALS OF HUMAN STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
• Prerequisites: EMT program completion and Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) department approval
Comprehensive course presenting basic information on the structure
and function of the human body. Applies principles of anatomy and
physiology to show interaction of body systems as they maintain
homeostasis. Each body system is presented with emphasis on the
cardiovascular, respiratory and nervous systems. Course must be
completed with a C or better to continue in the Paramedic Program.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Biology Biology
229
BSC 2062 3 3 0
EVERGLADES ECOLOGY
A non-lab science course designed to introduce students to the history,
biology, climatology, ecology, geology, hydrology, biodiversity,
evolution, and restoration of the Everglades. Topics include: the
Greater Everglades watershed, natural communities, flora and fauna
interactions, ecological niches, hydro-pattern modification and its
impact on the Everglades, exotic and invasive species, endangered
species, nutrient loads and cycles, habitat alteration, protected areas,
and the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan. This course will
not be considered for science general education credit.
BSC 2093C 4 3 3
HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY I
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English and EAP; and a minimum grade
of C in Honors high school biology or Advanced Placement
biology AND Honors high school chemistry or Advanced
Placement Chemistry; or BSC 1010C
Tissues, structure and function of integumentary, skeletal, muscular,
endocrine and nervous systems, and organs of special sense. Lab
exercises emphasize anatomic and physiologic principles associated
with classroom work. (Special Fee: $44.00)
BSC 2094C 4 3 3
HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in BSC2093C or department
approval
Continuation of BSC 2093C, including circulatory, cardiovascular,
lymphatic, respiratory, digestive, urinary and reproductive systems
with considerable emphasis on biochemistry of metabolic processes
and body fluids. (Special Fee: $58.00)
BSC 2366 3 3 0
NEOTROPICAL ECOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Consent of Instructor
This course emphasizes observations of ecological relationships of
plants and animals of the New World Tropics and associated habitats.
Onsite studies in neotropical locations (Costa Rica, Belize, Amazonia,
etc.) will emphasize basic ecological concepts, such as the niche concept,
niche portioning, symbiosis, competition, trophic structure, evolutionary
relationships, co-evolution and predation. In addition, this course will
emphasize identification of representative forms of life of various
tropical ecosystems in the study country located within the neotropics.
Both natural and artificial biological communities will be visited.
Special travel fees apply. A valid passport is required prior to travel.
This course will not be considered for science general education credit.
BSC 2933 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN BIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in biological sciences based on historical, traditional or
contemporary approach as background and interest of students and
professor dictate. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
BSC 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN BIOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including BSC 1010C. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of
4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Internship Fee: $10.00)
MCB 2010C (Formerly MCB 2000C) 4 3 3
MICROBIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in BSC 1010C or BSC 2093C
This lecture/lab course is designed for Health Science majors. Survey
of microbial forms with emphasis on bacteria and viruses: morphology,
physiology, genetic mechanisms, and control of microorganisms.
Pathogenic processes and microbes discussed in detail.
(Special Fee: $87.00)
MCB 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN MICROBIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in microbiology based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
OCB 2010C (Formerly OCB 2003C) 4 3 3
MARINE BIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: BSC 1010C or department approval
Survey course with lecture and lab. Topics include ocean as
environment (currents, tides, water chemistry, etc.); survey of marine
animals and plants; and marine ecosystems. Field trips required.
(Special Fee: $35.00)
OCB 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN MARINE BIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in marine biology based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 3 credits, provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Biology Biology
230
PCB 1440 (Formerly PCB 1435) 3 3 0
FLORIDA ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS
Focuses on Florida ecology. Combination of lecture, lab, field and
computer lab techniques used to study variety of habitats. Topics
include energy flow through food chains, environmental modeling and
general ecology. Prior exposure to general biology topics
recommended. No prior experience required.
PCB 1440H (Formerly PCB 1435H) 3 3 0
FLORIDA ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS-HONORS
Same as PCB 1435. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
PCB 2300C 3 2 3
AQUATIC BIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: BSC 1010C or department approval
Lecture, lab and field biological survey of lakes and streams including
taxonomy, ecology and life cycles of freshwater organisms with
emphasis on invertebrates. Covers physical and chemical factors of
freshwater ecosystems, such as origin of lakes, evolution of streams
and biogeochemical cycles of freshwater. Biology of polluted water
discussed. (Special Fee: $35.00)
PCB 2308 (Formerly PCB 2304) 1 0 3
NATURAL HISTORY OF FLORIDA RIVERS
Field ecology course. Topics include plants, animals, water chemistry,
stream flow dynamics, fresh water resources and management and
pollution. All-day field trip required.
PCB 2340 3 3 0
FIELD BIOLOGY
This is an introductory field biology course. Field work and field trips
are required. The course emphasizes basic science skills in field work
methodology including field observations, note taking, data collection,
and taxonomic identification of important species. General principles
of ecology will be emphasized, along with the significance and
importance of conserving biodiversity. Special travel fees apply.
PCB 2350 3 3 0
NEOTROPICAL BIOLOGY
This course introduces students to the history, biology, ecology,
diversity, and evolution of ecosystems of the New World tropics.
Emphasis will be on rainforest, riverine, savanna, estuarine, and coral
reef communities. Topics include: nutrient and energy cycling, light
gaps, vertical strata and forest structure, animal-plant interactions,
such as pollination biology, seed predation, dispersal and herbivory,
plant and animal defenses, social insects, and latitudinal trends in
biodiversity.
PCB 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ECOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in ecology based on the needs and areas of interest of
the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as
part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
ZOO 1030 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO BIRDWATCHING
A non-lab field course with supporting lecture, designed to increase
awareness of North American bird species. Some of the topics included
are: bird identification techniques, bird topography and anatomy, tips on
using field guides and checklists, binocular basics, basic birding
principles, identification of common backyard birds, urban birds, birds
of prey, wading birds, shore birds, and migratory species, conservation
measures and issues impacting bird populations, an introduction to the
ecology of birds, bird habitat relationships, birding by ear, taxonomy,
scientific nomenclature, Alpha codes, census techniques, eBird data
input and analysis, citizen science, and birding ethics. This course will
not be considered for science general education credit.
ZOO 2511 3 3 0
BEHAVIOR OF WILD HORSES
Non-lab course designed to introduce students to the study of animal
behavior by examining the maintenance behaviors and social
behaviors of horses, and by comparing them with behaviors shown by
other equids like zebras. Students also will study the ecology and
management of wild horses and learn to analyze and interpret data by
reading original journal articles. This course will not be considered for
science general education credit
ZOO 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ZOOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in zoology based on the needs and areas of interest of
the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as
part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for
a maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Building Construction Technology
See Civil/Surveying Engineering Technology and Drafting and Design
Technology for related course descriptions.
BCN 1272 3 3 0
CONSTRUCTION BLUEPRINT READING
Study of various types of drawings and documents used in
construction industry. Includes such topics as terminology,
abbreviations, symbols, notations, scales and dimensions, meaning of
lines, drawing history, technical and orthographic projection, types of
construction and trade information.
BCN 1721 4 4 0
CONSTRUCTION PLANNING AND CONTROL
• Recommended prerequisite: BCN 2563
Survey of important points to be considered in construction project.
Covers development of CPM (Critical Path Method) plan with
emphasis on construction activities, time durations, scheduling,
sequence of operations, follow-up methods, project control and
integration of calendar dates to plan. (Special Fee: $31.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Biology Building Construction Technology
231
BCN 2563 3 3 0
BUILDING SERVICE SYSTEMS
• Recommended prerequisite: ETC 1251
Survey of design and installation of various mechanical and electrical
systems used in buildings. Covers heat loss and heat gain, comfort
control, water systems, system installation and coordination,
illumination and other selected topics.
BCN 2930 1 - 6 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Provides exposure to various technical and non-technical disciplines
in which students are likely to become involved upon entry into the
building construction environment. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 12 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
BCN 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN CONSTRUCTION
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ETC 1251. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has
the discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the
waiver of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
BCN 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN ARCHITECTURAL/BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ETC 1251 and TAR 1120C. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/
discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
BCT 1705 3 3 0
CONTRACTS, CODES, SPECIFICATIONS AND OFFICE PRACTICES
• Recommended prerequisite: ETC 1251
Covers organization and operation of architect's, engineer's or
contractor's office and includes study of office practices, codes,
standards, specifications and legal documents related to
construction industry.
BCT 2770 (Formerly BCT 2600) 4 4 0
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ESTIMATING
• Prerequisite: BCN 1272 or TAR 1120C
Basic steps of estimating from review of drawings and specifications to
development of final estimate including overhead and profit factors.
Prepares students to make some estimates commonly used in the
construction industry. (Special Fee: $31.00)
ETC 1251 (Formerly ETM 1822) 4 4 0
ENGINEERING MATERIALS AND PROCESSES
Survey of basic materials used in industry, metallic and non-metallic,
and processes used to form, fabricate and finish these materials.
Survey of materials and methods used in construction. Covers broad
areas of wood, concrete, masonry, metal and other building materials.
Students select various topics for class presentation. Variety of audio
visual material enhances student understanding of topics. This course
includes learning activity designed to ensure competence in oral
communication. (Special Fee: $ 16.00)
TAR 1120C 4 2 2
ARCHITECTURAL DRAWING I
• Prerequisites: ETD 1100C and ETD 1320
Covers residential design and wood frame construction with additional
study in aspects of housing, aesthetics and working drawings. Students
prepare assigned drawings. (Special Fee: $44.00)
TAR 2033C 3 2 2
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
• Prerequisite: TAR 1120C
Introduction to architectural planning and design. Use of project team
concept. Student projects include shopping centers, industrial
complexes, production facilities, apartment complexes, high-rise
buildings, etc. Students prepare necessary drawings to construct
project, including site plan, building plans, sections, etc. Students also
build a model of their project. (Special Fee: $46.00)
Business Administration and Management
BUL 2241 3 3 0
BUSINESS LAW I
• Prerequisite: ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or ENC 1210 or
GEB 1011 or IDH 1110 or OST 1335
Introduction to law, its social forces and agencies for enforcement;
effects of governmental regulation on business and society, including
environmental law, community planning and consumer protection,
contracts, and personal property, including bailments and sales.
BUL 2242 3 3 0
BUSINESS LAW II
• Prerequisite: BUL 2241
Continuation of study of law, including commercial paper, creditors'
rights under secured transactions, insurance, bankruptcy, agency,
employment, partnerships, corporations and real property.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Building Construction Technology Business Administration and Management
232
GEB 1011 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO BUSINESS
Fundamentals of business organization and procedures to acquaint
student with management, business terminology, organization and
control of large and small business.
GEB 1136 3 3 0
FOUNDATIONS OF E-BUSINESS
This course provides an overview of functional and general managerial
view of e-business and e-commerce. Students will discuss how to
manage e-businesses, as well as the risks and opportunities of such
ventures. Discussions will include business-to-business, business-toconsumer
and intrabusiness models. The course presents models and
cases for existing “brick and mortar” operations, as well as for the
entrepreneur planning a new e-business.
GEB 1137 3 3 0
E-BUSINESS MODELS AND STRATEGIES
• Prerequisite: Department approval
This capstone course provides a broad overview of the strategies used
in e-business from the early days of the commercial Internet to the
present. The course will address the Internet, various business models
and the macro environment. Students will have to present an ebusiness
model in class.
GEB 1138 3 3 0
E-BUSINESS LAW AND ETHICS
This course provides an overview of the many legal issues involved
in starting and maintaining a Web-based company. The course
provides knowledge for addressing the many legal issues of setting
up a Web-based business. Intellectual property rights including
patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade secrets, and others are
covered in this course.
GEB 1350 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
This course is an entry-level overview of current world trade activities,
practices, and issues. It is designed to provide the student with a
basic, practical understanding of international business operations in
the context of global competitiveness, regional trading blocs, and the
globalization of world markets.
GEB 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN BUSINESS
Selected topics in business based on the needs and areas of interest of
the class and professor. May include significant research or field-work
component as part of the class. May be repeated for a maximum of 6
credits, provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
GEB 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN BUSINESS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including GEB 1011 or ACG 2021 or BUL 2241. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/
discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
GEB 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN BUSINESS
• Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes; a minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA; and 12
credits, including GEB 1011, or ACG 2021, or BUL 2241, or
ECO 2013, or ECO 2023. The Program Director/Program
Chair/ Program Coordinator or Internship and Workforce
Services Office has the discretion to provide override approval
as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skills learned in class and enhance
workplace skills through supervised practical experiences related to
their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship requires a
minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00).
GEB 2955 1 - 3 variable
IMMERSION IN GLOBAL BUSINESS
• Prerequisite: GEB 1011
The objective of this course is to immerse students in foreign cultures,
giving them the opportunity to witness business activities, economic
changes, and social/cultural impact due to globalization. Course may
be repeated up to a maximum of 6 credit hours, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
MAN 2021 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: ECO 2013 or ECO 2023 or GEB 1011 or GEB 1136
This course is a study of the essentials of operational management and
how to apply these principles in the dynamic world of business. It
covers the functions of management through a basic understanding of
planning, organizing, staffing, directing and controlling. This course
will study traditional and e-business operations.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Business Administration and Management Business Administration and Management
233
MAN 2300 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
This course is an overview of the field of human resources
management. The role of the human resources department will be
emphasized with particular attention being focused upon the
importance of the supervisors and executives. This course will discuss
business in the traditional and electronic environments.
MAN 2934 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN MANAGEMENT
For students interested in discussion, exploration and observation of
special topics in management. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 9 credits provided different topic explored each
time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MAN 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN BUSINESS (MANAGEMENT)
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including GEB 1011. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has
the discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the
waiver of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum 4 credits, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
MAN 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN BUSINESS (MANAGEMENT)
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including GEB 1011 and MAN 2021. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
MAR 2011 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING
• Prerequisite: ECO 2013 or ECO 2023 or GEB 1011 or GEB 1136
This course provides basic principles and perspectives of the
functions, institutions, methods and problems of marketing goods and
services through traditional paths as well as through e-business.
MAR 2150 3 3 0
INTERNATIONAL MARKETING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GEB 1350
This course examines marketing concepts and strategies as applied to
global markets. Students will explore the implications of organizing
people, process, and technology given the influences of ideas, culture,
laws, and economics. The course is intended to be more hands-on,
although students will use a combination of text, lectures, case studies,
outside reading, company research, video, group work, and
presentation to enhance learning and practicing skills.
MAR 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN BUSINESS (MARKETING)
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including GEB 1011. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has
the discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the
waiver of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides
students with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
MAR 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN BUSINESS (MARKETING)
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including both MAR 2011 and GEB 1011. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
MKA 2021 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF SELLING
• Prerequisite: GEB 1011 or GEB 1136
Combination of principles and techniques of selling. Emphasis on
person-to-person situations, consumer motivations, persuasion and
problems dealing with the psychology of sales situations.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Business Administration and Management Business Administration and Management
234
MKA 2511 3 3 0
ADVERTISING
• Prerequisite: GEB 1011 or GEB 1136
Study of modern advertising from marketing, communications,
consumer and legal viewpoints. Emphasis on media selection, sales
promotion and creative development of advertising. Addresses
traditional and electronic advertising.
MNA 1031 3 3 0
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: GEB 1011 or GEB 1136
This course provides the foundation for understanding the broad
concepts of successful planning, organization and implementation
within the realm of information technology. The course uses real-world
examples and identifies common mistakes and pitfalls in project
management. Topics covered include project scoping, estimating,
budgeting, scheduling, tracking, and controlling.
MNA 2320 3 3 0
HUMAN RESOURCES RECRUITMENT, SELECTION AND STAFFING
• Prerequisite: MAN 2300
This course examines how the functions of recruitment, selection and
staffing/training fit into a Human Resources Department. Students will
practice analyzing position, recruiting qualified applicants, interviewing
candidates for employment and, once hired, orient and train them.
MNA 2325 3 3 0
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS SYSTEMS
• Prerequisite: MAN 2300
This course discusses various compensation and benefits plans, legal
issues, and the administration of compensation and benefits plans.
Emphasis is on providing a basic understanding of the business
concepts utilized in the compensation and benefits area.
MNA 2329 3 3 0
CASE STUDIES IN HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisites: MAN 2300, MNA 2320, MNA 2325, and MNA 2403
This course uses a case study, experiential/simulated learning approach
to build upon and apply Human Resources Management concepts.
Students will develop and apply their communication and employee
relations skills and problem-solving and decision-making abilities to
cases that reflect work-related, human resources challenges.
MNA 2403 3 3 0
HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT LAW AND EMPLOYEE
RELATIONS
• Prerequisites: BUL 2241 and MAN 2300
This course is a study of law as it applies to the management of human
resources. Particular emphasis is placed on the impact of legal issues,
laws, and organization policies on the employee-employer relationship.
MTB 1103 3 3 0
BUSINESS MATHEMATICS
Practical application of mathematics to computational problems of
business and consumerism. Business applications include decimals,
fractions, percentages, interest rates, bank records, payroll and
merchandising.
RMI 1201 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF PROPERTY AND LIABILITY
This course covers basic property and liability insurance concepts.
This includes insurance fundamentals such as types of insurers,
institutions that provide insurance, how it is regulated, measurement
of financial performance; insurance operations such as marketing,
underwriting and claims; insurance contracts, loss exposure and
risk management.
RMI 1521 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF INSURANCE
This course outlines the process of marketing insurance products
to the ultimate consumer and, as such, will benefit all insurance
professionals from the novice to the seasoned professional. In
addition, it prepares students for Part I of the INS-21 National
Examination offered by the Insurance Institute of America.
RMI 1522 3 3 0
PERSONAL INSURANCE
• Prerequisite: RMI 1521
This is an in-depth course for all forms of personal insurance,
including auto, home, life, health and miscellaneous coverages. It is
designed for all insurance professionals–from producers to
underwriters. In addition, it prepares students for Part II of the INS-22
National Examination offered by the Insurance Institute of America.
RMI 1523 3 3 0
COMMERCIAL INSURANCE
• Prerequisite: RMI 1522
This course presents an in-depth study of all forms of commercial
insurance including general liability, property, bonding, worker’s
compensation, package policies, and garage coverages. It is intended
for all insurance professionals–from producers to underwriters. In
addition, it prepares students for Part III of the INS-23 National
Examination offered by the Insurance Institute of America.
RMI 1612 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF CASUALTY INSURANCE AND SURETY BONDING
• Prerequisite: RMI 1523
This course is an introduction to the eight areas of insurance including
automobile liability and physical damage insurance, worker’s
compensation and employers’ liability insurance, business,
professional and personal liability insurance, health insurance and
miscellaneous casualty coverages.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Business Administration and Management Business Administration and Management
235
RMI 1613 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF PROPERTY INSURANCE
• Prerequisite: RMI 1523
This course is an introduction to the four areas of fire insurance: ocean
marine, inland marine, surety and fidelity bond, and multiple-line
coverage. For each of these four areas, specimen contracts are
examined. The course covers each area with regard to the perils,
property, losses, persons, locations, time and hazards.
RMI 2110 3 3 0
PERSONAL INSURANCE PLANNING
• Prerequisite: RMI 1201
This course covers all forms of personal insurance, including auto,
home, other residential insurance such as fire and earthquake
insurance; marine insurance; other personal property and liability
insurance; financial planning; life insurance and health insurance.
RMI 2213 3 3 0
COMMERCIAL INSURANCE
• Prerequisites: RMI 1201 and RMI 2110
This course covers all forms of commercial insurance, including
commercial property, business income, commercial crime, equipment
breakdown, inland and ocean marine, commercial general liability,
commercial automobile, business owners policies and farm insurance,
worker’s compensation and employers liability, and other
miscellaneous coverage.
RMI 2524 3 3 0
ESSENTIALS OF RISK MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: RMI 1613
This course focuses on the risk management decision-making process
by identifying, analyzing and developing alternative techniques for
treating loss exposures. In addition, it introduces the financial
management foundation and guidelines for selecting the best risk
management alternative and most appropriate technique for handling
a loss exposure. (Preparation for Insurance Institute of America ARM 54)
RMI 2942 1 - 4 Variable
INTERNSHIP IN INSURANCE
• Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes; a minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA; and 12
credits, including GEB 1011 and RMI 1201 or RMI 1521. The
Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship and Workforce Services Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skills learned in class and enhance
workplace skills through supervised practical experience related to
their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship requires a
minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00);
SBM 1000 (Formerly MAN 1800) 3 3 0
SMALL BUSINESS MANAGEMENT
This course provides basic principles needed for successfully starting
and maintaining a traditional and Web-based small business, including
procedures for planning, locating, operating, evaluating and
controlling a small business. Presents basic foundations of budgeting,
marketing, research, promotion, profit analysis and advertising. This
course is recommended for students interested in starting their own
business, currently operating a small business or currently employed in
a small business environment. This course is structured for the
entrepreneur in a traditional as well as an electronic environment.
Cardiovascular Technology
To register for any of the Cardiovascular Technology courses, you must
apply and be accepted to the Cardiovascular Technology program.
CVT 1000C 4 3 3
INTRODUCTION TO CARDIOVASCULAR TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Cardiovascular A.S. Degree program
This course is an overview of the profession including basic skills and
terminology related to historical development, current profession
trends, infection control, asepsis, and basic cardiopulmonary patient
assessment tools using electrocardiography, chest roentgenography,
and clinical laboratory tests. (Special Fee: $79.00)
CVT 1205C 3 2 3
CARDIOVASCULAR PHARMACOLOGY AND ECG MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1260C
• Corequisite: CVT 1270 and CVT 1841L
This course is structured to furnish the student with the
pharmacological background necessary to function in clinical
experiences in the cardiac catheterization lab. It includes classification
of medications, modes of action, indications, contraindications,
application in the treatment of cardiovascular disease, and the effects
on hemodynamic and electrophysiologic variables. This course also
prepares the student to identify basic cardiac dysrhythmias.
(Special Fee: $55.00)
CVT 1260C 4 3 3
INVASIVE CARDIOLOGY I: CARDIOPULMONARY ANATOMY AND
PHYSIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1000C
• Corequisite: CVT 1840L
This course includes adult, fetal, and newborn cardiopulmonary
anatomy and physiology in detail as it applies to the cardiac
catheterization lab. Application also includes blood gas analysis,
cardiac electrophysiology including ECG dysrhythmias and other
hemodynamic calculations required in cardiopulmonary physiology.
(Special Fee: $109.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Business Administration and Management Cardiovascular Technology
236
CVT 1270 3 3 0
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1260C
• Corequisite: CVT 1205C
This course is structured to provide the student with the dynamic
aspects of disease processes. It is conceptually structured to present
the concepts of disease processes by organ system. Precedence will be
on understanding the etiology and pathogenesis of a given disorder.
Emphasis will be on disorders of the immune system as it relates to
adverse reactions to drugs, hematologic, fluid and electrolytes,
cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, neurologic, and endocrine disorders.
CVT 1840L 2 0 6
CARDIOVASCULAR CLINICAL PRACTICUM I
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1000C
• Corequisite: CVT 1260C
(Completion of health physical with required vaccinations and BLS
certification required prior to this course.) In this course the student
will participate in supervised clinical practices located in the mock
catheterization lab and at local clinical affiliates. The student will
observe activities in the following hospital departments: cardiac
catheterization lab, non-invasive cardiology, echocardiology, intensive
care units, medical/surgical floors, and emergency department.
(Special Fee: $55.00)
CVT 1841L 2 0 6
CARDIOVASCULAR CLINICAL PRACTICUM II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1840L
• Corequisites: CVT 1205C and CVT 1270
This course is designed to prepare and test the competency of the CVT
student on basic skills in sterile technique, radiation safety, electrical
safety, basic tray set-up, and patient prep prior to his/her diagnostic
cardiac catheterization clinical rotation. (Special Fee: $55.00)
CVT 2211C 4 3 3
CRITICAL CARE APPLICATIONS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in CVT 2420C and
CVT 2620C
• Corequisite: CVT 2421C and CVT 2843L
This course is designed to teach the student the theory, application,
and evaluation of critical care measure for medical and surgical
emergencies. These applications include chest tubes, emergent
airways, intra-aortic balloon pumping, long-term pulmonary artery
monitoring and arterial lines. In addition, the student will apply prior
knowledge in cardiovascular technology to the specialty areas of
peripheral angiography and electrophysiology. (Special Fee: $109.00)
CVT 2420C 4 3 3
INVASIVE CARDIOLOGY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1205C
• Corequisites: CVT 2620C and CVT 2842L
This course introduces the student to the specific procedures
performed in the cardiac catheterization lab and to the use of the
resulting data for patient diagnosis. Additional topics include aseptic
techniques, sterilization, patient assessment, radiography,
pharmacology, cardiac waveforms, coronary artery anatomy,
equipment and tools utilized in cardiac catheterization, hemodynamic
data and analysis, right and left heart catheterizations, and
complications of cardiac catheterization and subsequent treatments.
(Special Fee: $109.00)
CVT 2421C 4 3 3
INVASIVE CARDIOLOGY III
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 2420C
• Corequisites: CVT 2211C and CVT 2843L
This course is designed to assimilate cardiac diseases as well as to
continue teaching the use of equipment and techniques used in
invasive cardiology. Includes an in-depth presentation of various
diseases including coronary artery disease, angina, myocardial
infarction, heart failure, valve diseases, cardiomyopathies, pericardial
disorders, dysrhythmias, congenital anomalies and repair procedures.
Additionally, students will learn the various calculations performed in
the catheterization lab including cardiac outputs, vascular resistance,
valve areas, and shunts. (Special Fee: $109.00)
CVT 2426C 2 1 3
ADVANCED CARDIOVASCULAR CONCEPTS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in CVT 2421C and CVT 2211C
• Corequisites: CVT 2920 and CVT 2844L
This final course is designed to furnish the student with the basics of
special procedures and peripheral vascular intervention. The course
includes anatomy and physiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
intervention for diseases of the aorta, peripheral arteries, carotid
artery, and renal artery. The laboratory component will include review
and operation of specialty catheters, wires, and devices used in
current vascular interventional procedures. (Special Fee: $109.00)
CVT 2620C 4 3 3
NON-INVASIVE CARDIOLOGY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1205C
• Corequisite: CVT 2420C and CVT 2842L
This course presents an introduction to non-invasive cardiology
including those tests performed for the purpose of the diagnosis
and treatment of cardiac disease. Topics include: 12 lead
electrocardiography, cardiac stress testing, Holter monitoring,
pacemaker basics, and an introduction to echocardiography.
(Special Fee: $109.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Cardiovascular Technology Cardiovascular Technology
237
CVT 2842L 4 0 24
CARDIOVASCULAR CLINICAL PRACTICUM III
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 1841L
Clinical experience in all procedures performed in the cardiovascular
laboratories, including use of equipment, performing tests and patient
care as it relates to the cardiovascular areas. Emphasis will be placed
on cardiac catheterization, ECG, stress testing, Holter monitoring, and
an introduction to echocardiography. (Special Fee: $79.00)
CVT 2843L 4 0 24
CARDIOVASCULAR CLINICAL PRACTICUM IV
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 2842L
This course is designed for students to gain a more in-depth clinical
experience in invasive cardiology including pre and post
catheterization activities, cardiovascular techniques, hemodynamic
monitoring, intra-aortic balloon pumping, and cardiac output
measurements. Clinical practice in the cardiac catheterization lab
includes circulating, scrubbing, recording and manipulating the
imaging equipment during diagnostic and interventional
catheterization procedures. (Special Fee: $55.00)
CVT 2844L 3 0 24
CARDIOVASCULAR CLINICAL PRACTICUM V
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CVT 2843L
• Corequisites: CVT 2426C and CVT 2920
This final clinical course is designed for students to gain additional
experience and polish their skills in the cardiac catheterization lab,
performing all duties in diagnostic and interventional cases.
(Special Fee: $55.00)
CVT 2920 2 2 0
CARDIOVASCULAR TECHNOLOGIST AS A PROFESSIONAL
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in CVT 2421C and CVT 2211C
• Corequisites: CVT 2426C and CVT 2844L
The professional relationship of the Cardiovascular Technologist to
other health professionals is presented, along with a basic format for
research. Résumé preparation and interview skills are presented, and
management, legal and ethical issues are discussed.
CVT 2930 1 - 4 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN CARDIOVASCULAR TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: CVT 1000C
For students interested in obtaining additional cardiovascular
technology skills. Provides clinical and/or laboratory experience and
seminar type discussion activities for students pursuing selected
topics in cardiovascular technology. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot
be applied.
CVT 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN CARDIOVASCULAR TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including CVT 1840L, CVT 1841L, and CVT 2842L. In
addition, students must have a minimum grade of C in all
cardiovascular courses and have the Program Director’s
approval.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Chemistry
CHM 1020 3 3 0
CHEMISTRY IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Meets general education requirement for non-science major. Study of
some basic concepts in inorganic chemistry, organic chemistry and
biochemistry. Students apply principles as they analyze, discuss and
make decisions on chemically related problems that affect everyday
life. (Not a prerequisite for any other science course)
CHM 1025C 4 3 3
INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL CHEMISTRY
• Prerequisite: One year of high school algebra or minimum grade
of C in MAT 0022C or MAT 0028C or appropriate score on an
approved assessment
Prepares students without high school chemistry or with inadequate
background for CHM 1045C. Modern chemical theories used to develop
understanding of fundamentals of inorganic chemistry and its
applications. Emphasis on quantitative relationships, using
dimensional analysis to solve problems. Laboratory experiences are
integral part of course. May not be taken for credit subsequent to
earning C or better in CHM 1045C. (Special Fee: $66.00)
CHM 1045C 4 3 3
GENERAL CHEMISTRY WITH QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS I
• Prerequisites: CHM 1025C or one year of high school chemistry
with a minimum grade of C; and MAC 1102 or MAC 1105 or two
years of high school algebra or an appropriate score on an
approved mathematics assessment
A study of the basic principles of chemistry including chemical
reactivity, atomic structure, chemical bonding, molecular geometry,
periodicity, stoichiometry, and kinetic-molecular treatment of gases.
Laboratory illustrates principles discussed in classroom.
(Special Fee: $67.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Cardiovascular Technology Chemistry
238
CHM1045H 4 3 3
GENERAL CHEMISTRY WITH QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS I - HONORS
Same as CHM 1045C. In addition, course content will satisfy one
Honors Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission
required. (Special Fee: $67.00)
CHM 1046C 4 3 3
GENERAL CHEMISTRY WITH QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS II
• Prerequisite: CHM 1045C with C or better
Continuation of CHM 1045C dealing mainly with equilibrium theory,
thermodynamics, chemical kinetics and electrochemistry. Laboratory
illustrates principles of ionic equilibria within framework of qualitative
analysis. (Special Fee: $ 66.00)
CHM 1046H 4 3 3
GENERAL CHEMISTRY WITH QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS II - HONORS
Same as CHM 1046C. In addition, course content will satisfy one
Honors Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission
required. (Special Fee: $66.00)
CHM 1205C 4 3 3
INTRODUCTORY ORGANIC AND BIOCHEMISTRY
• Prerequisites: CHM 1025C (or one year of high school chemistry
with a minimum grade of C) and MAT 0020C or
MAT 0024C with a minimum grade of C or an appropriate score
on an approved assessment
Introduces students planning careers in health-related fields or in life
sciences to organic and biochemistry. Study of structures and typical
reactions of functional groups, structures and functions of classes of
biomolecules and energy flows of biological systems. Laboratory
portion of course provides students with exercises illustrating
principles of organic and biochemistry. (Special Fee: $77.00)
CHM 2210C 4 3 3
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I
• Prerequisite: CHM 1046C or comparable college-level general
chemistry course
Deals with aliphatic and aromatic compounds, their properties,
reactions and synthesis, emphasizing dependence of properties and
reaction mechanisms upon structure. Laboratory illustrates techniques
of separation, identification and purification. (Special Fee: $161.00)
CHM 2211C 4 3 3
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CHM 2210C
Continuation of CHM 2210C with laboratory devoted to multistep
synthesis. (Special Fee: $148.00)
CHM 2933 1 - 3 variable
SPECIAL TOPICS IN CHEMISTRY
• Prerequisites: CHM 1045C and department approval
For advanced students in chemistry who wish to pursue certain topics
in detail in chemistry as chosen by the class, to research topics, to
present information, and lead discussion with other students and
faculty members. Lecture/laboratory instruction. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credits, provided different
topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
CHM 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN CHEMISTRY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including CHM 1025C or CHM 1045C. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Civil/Surveying Engineering Technology
See Architectural/Building Construction Technology and Drafting and
Design Technology for related course descriptions.
BCN 2405 4 4 0
STATICS AND STRENGTH OF MATERIALS
• Prerequisite: MTB 2321 or MAC 1114 or higher math or
department approval
Covers principles of statics, structural mechanics and effects of loads
and loading on building elements and frames. Some major areas
include materials, stress and deformation, properties of sections,
gravity loads, shear and bending in beams, and stresses in columns.
ETC 2521 4 4 0
HYDRAULICS AND HYDROLOGY
• Recommended prerequisites: MAC 1114 or higher mathematics
or MTB 2321 or department approval
A study in basic theory and design of hydrology related to drainage
areas, storm water runoff and stream-flow analysis. This course also
includes a study in basic theory and design of hydraulics of flow in
pipes and in open channels. Design concepts, techniques, and
illustrations of hydrology and hydraulics will be utilized.
SUR 1101C 4 2 2
BASIC SURVEYING AND MEASUREMENTS (SURVEYING I)
• Prerequisite: MTB 2321 or MAC 1114 or higher mathematics or
department approval
Elementary surveying, including fundamentals of plane surveying; use
and care of equipment. Covers accurate measuring of distance; theory
and practice of leveling, angles and bearings; principles and use of
transit; curves; stadia; and topographic and land surveying.
Coordinated class, lab and field assignments. (Special Fee: $50.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Chemistry Civil/Surveying Engineering Technology
239
SUR 2202C 4 4 0
HIGHWAY DRAFTING AND ROUTE DESIGN
• Prerequisite: SUR 1101C
• Recommended prerequisite: ETD 1320
Highway drafting includes topographic maps, plans and profiles and
cross sections. Route design covers traffic and vehicular characteristics,
curvature and elevation of roadbeds, earthwork and aerial photography
as they affect cost and route design. (Special Fee: $41.00)
SUR 2390 4 4 0
INTRODUCTION TO GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEMS
• Recommended prerequisite: Computer proficiency
This course covers the application of Geographic Information Systems
to a variety of professional, industry and business uses. It also provides
students with an opportunity to gain hands-on experience in utilizing
the application software currently in use in this region.
(Special Fee: $38.00)
SUR 2400 3 3 0
LEGAL ASPECTS OF SURVEYING
• Prerequisite: SUR 1101C or department approval
Legal principles of boundary location and professionalism; history of
boundary surveys; sectional surveys; legal descriptions, property
transfer, resurveys, subdivision plats; surveyor in court; water
boundaries.
SUR 2460 3 4 0
SUBDIVISIONS
• Prerequisite: SUR 2202C
• Recommended prerequisite: ETC 2521
Plat construction from tract description to final record plat; plat
drafting; necessary computations; lettering meaning of legal parts;
current plat laws and regulations. (Special Fee: $33.00)
SUR 2640 4 4 0
ADVANCED SURVEYING COMPUTATIONS (SURVEYING III)
• Prerequisite: SUR 1101C
• Recommended prerequisite: ETD 1320
Advanced surveying office computations; traverse, horizontal curve,
and vertical curve review; coordinates areas by D.M.D. and
coordinates; partitioning problems; intersection problems (line-line,
line-curve, curve-curve); missing traverse parts; compound and
reverse curve computations; spirals; principles of significant figures
and solution analysis. (Special Fee: $35.00)
SUR 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN SURVEYING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including SUR 1101C. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
SUR 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN CIVIL/SURVEYING ENGINEERING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including both ETD 1320 and SUR 1101C. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that will provide
students with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course
work and enhance workplace skills through supervised practical
experiences related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of
Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Computed Tomography
See Radiography
Computer Engineering Technology
(Networking)
See Electronics Engineering Technology for additional course
descriptions.
CET 1600C 4 4 0
CISCO NETWORKING FUNDAMENTALS
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C or department
approval
This course is designed to prepare a student to apply and understand
the basics of networking hardware. This course covers the OSI Model
and industry standards, network topologies, IP addressing, including
subnet masks, and basic network design. This is the first of a four-part
series designed to prepare students for the Cisco Certified Networking
Associate exam. (Special Fee: $36.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Civil/Surveying Engineering Technology Computer Engineering Technology
240
CET 1610C 3 2 2
CISCO ROUTER TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C or department
approval
This course is designed to prepare a student to apply and understand
the basics of networking hardware. This course covers the beginning
router configurations, routed and routing protocols, and an
introduction to LAN switching. This is the second of a four-part series
designed to prepare students for the Cisco Certified Networking
Associate exam. (Special Fee: $36.00)
CET 2178C (Formerly CET 2252C) 3 3 1
A+ CONCEPTS (HARDWARE)
Hands-on laboratory-oriented course. An introductory course in
microcomputer hardware and related applications. The course is
designed to introduce the student to the operation, support, and
troubleshooting of PCs. Major topics in this course are hardware
concepts, troubleshooting, repair, maintenance and support of PCs.
This course along with CET 2179C, will prepare the students for the A+
certification exam. (Special Fee: $31.00)
CET 2179C 3 3 0
A+ CONCEPTS (SOFTWARE)
Hands-on laboratory-oriented course. An introductory course in
microcomputer software and applications. This course is designed to
introduce the student to different operating systems including Windows
9X, Windows NT, Windows 2000, and Windows XP. This course will
prepare the students for the software examination of the CompTIA A+
certification. This course includes a learning activity designed to ensure
competence in oral communication. (Special Fee: $31.00)
CET 2486C 3 3 1
LOCAL AREA NETWORKS
Presents essential material useful to students with no technical data
processing or electronics background. Discusses different LAN
techniques and matches merits of user's requirements to meet
business needs. Case studies present real situations and appropriate
solutions. (Special Fee: $31.00)
CET 2544C 3 2 2
COMPUTER VIRTUALIZATION TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C
This course is designed to provide students with a working knowledge
of VMware Workstation as a leading virtualization product. In addition
to learning how to install and use VMware Workstation, students will
learn how to apply virtualization technology to set up virtual networks,
provide for disaster recovery, create high-availability solutions with
clustering, improve security and performance, and use management
software to administer multiple virtual machines.
CET 2546C 3 2 2
VMWARE INFRASTRUCTURE ARCHITECTURE
• Prerequisites: CET 2544C and CET2792C
This course will provide the learner with the insight needed to design,
implement, and troubleshoot virtual data centers using VMware
Infrastructure. Some of the explored topics include: vCenter server
deployment; ESXi server configuration and management; Distributed
vSwitch services; vSphere Networking Fundamentals, and virtual
infrastructure security guidelines.
CET 2588 4 4 0
NETWORK +
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C or department approval
This course will identify the components of a LAN and determine the
type of network design most appropriate for a given site; identify the
different media used in network communications, distinguish between
them, and determine how to use them to connect servers and
workstations in a network; differentiate between the different
networking standards, protocols, and access methods, and determine
which would be most appropriate for a given LAN; recognize the
primary network architectures, identify their major characteristics,
and determine which would be most appropriate for a proposed LAN;
identify the primary functions of network operating systems;
determine how to implement and support the major networking
components (including the server, operating system, and clients),
propose a system for adequately securing data on a given LAN and
protecting the system’s components, and distinguish between LANs
and WANs. (Special Fee: $31.00)
CET 2615C 3 2 2
CISCO ADVANCED ROUTER TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: CET 1610C or department approval
This course is designed to prepare a student to apply and understand
the advanced principles and applications of networking hardware.
This course covers the advanced router configurations, LAN switching,
network management, and advanced network design. This is the third
of a four-part series designed to prepare students for the Cisco
Certified Networking Associate exam. (Special Fee: $36.00)
CET 2620C 4 4 0
CISCO PROJECTS IN ROUTING DESIGN AND ADMINISTRATION
• Prerequisite: CET 2615C or department approval
This course is designed to prepare a student to apply and understand
the advanced principles, applications, and implementation of
networking hardware. This course covers the advanced network design
projects and advanced network management projects. This is the
fourth of a four-part series designed to prepare students for the Cisco
Certified Networking Associate exam. (Special Fee: $36.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Computer Engineering Technology Computer Engineering Technology
241
CET 2625 5 5 0
BUILDING SCALABLE CISCO INTERNETWORKS
• Prerequisite: CET 2620C or department approval
This course focuses on Cisco routers that are connected in LANs and
WANs and are typically found at medium to large network sites.
Students will be able to select and implement the appropriate Cisco
IOS services to build a scalable, routed network. This course is part of
the recommended training path for students seeking the (CCNP) Cisco
Certified Network Professional certification.
CET 2660C 3 2 2
CYBER SECURITY FUNDAMENTALS
• Prerequisite: CET 2179C and CET 2486C
This course provides the essential information required to serve as the
foundation for entry into Cyber Security and Digital Forensics
specialization. The course engages the student with numerous network
security and digital forensics-related labs designed to introduce
concepts and develop techniques essential for success in this track.
Hands-on, in-class exercises are conducted in both Microsoft Windows
and Linux environments. Emphasis is made in the use of both closed
and open-source operating systems and security-related utilities.
(Special Fee: $38.00)
CET 2675C 3 1.5 1.5
VOICE OVER IP
• Prerequisites: CET 2486C and EET 1214C
This course will focus on understanding the architecture of voice
communication and will show how signaling, call quality, and PBXs
work within data networks. The course also will provide real-world,
multi-vendor options for integrating voice and data communication
applications. (Special Fee: $36.00)
CET 2722 3 3 0
MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER 2003 ENVIRONMENT
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C
This course teaches the student how to manage and maintain a
Microsoft Windows Server 2003 environment. The student will learn
how to manage physical and logical devices; how to manage users,
computers and groups; how to manage and maintain access to
recourses; and how to manage and maintain a server environment.
The course also covers Managing and Implementing Disaster Recovery.
CET 2784 3 3 0
WIDE AREA NETWORKS
• Prerequisite: CET 2486C or department approval
Students learn principles of wide area network systems. Topics include
current telephone systems architecture for voice and data. Application
of standards in data switching presented as a basis for discussion of
WAN digital communications. Key issues in WASN technology are
defined: connection-oriented versus connection less service,
synchronous versus asynchronous links, and details of frames, packets
and cells in data communications. Followed by presentation of all
current WAN technologies including Broadband, ISDN, X.25 packet
switching, Frame Relay, SONET, SMDS, and ATM.
CET 2792C 3 2 2
MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER NETWORK
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C or department
approval
This course provides the student with the knowledge and skills
necessary for installing, configuring, managing, and supporting the
latest Microsoft network infrastructure. Major focus would be on the
understanding of the network technologies most commonly used with
Windows Server 2008 and IP-enabled networks. This course will
prepare the student for the Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist
(MCTS) 70-642 Windows Server 2008 Network Infrastructure exam and
is a required course for the MCITP: Server Administrator certification.
(Special Fee: $39.00)
CET 2793C 4 2 2
MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER ADMINISTRATOR
• Prerequisite: CET 2792C or department approval
This course will provide the student with the knowledge and practical
experience to administer, maintain, troubleshoot, and secure a
complex Windows Server environment. Main topics include, managing
physical and logical devices, managing and controlling resources,
implementing group policies for security, and maximizing performance
and responsiveness. This is a required course for Microsoft Windows
Server 2008 Administration (MCITP) certification. (Special Fee: $39.00)
CET 2794C 3 2 2
MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER ACTIVE DIRECTORY
• Prerequisite: CET 2792C or department approval
Course is designed to prepare students to troubleshoot and identify
Microsoft Server Active Directory related issues. In addition, the
student will be able to configure Group Policies to implement Security
and Active Directory Services in a distributed environment. This is a
required course for Microsoft Certified IT Professional (MCITP) 2008
Server and Enterprise. (Special Fee: $39.00)
CET 2795 4 4 0
DESIGNING MICROSOFT WINDOWS SERVER 2003 ACTIVE
DIRECTORY INFRASTRUCTURE
• Prerequisite: CET 2794 or department approval
This course provides students with the knowledge and skills necessary
to design a Microsoft Windows 2003 directory services infrastructure
in an enterprise network. (Special Fee: $39.00)
CET 2810C 3 2 2
MICROSOFT EXCHANGE SERVER
• Prerequisite: CET 2794C
This course will focus on the deployment, configuration, and
administration of the Exchange Server, the cornerstone of Microsoft’s
Unified Communications solution. The student will gain practical
experience in installing and managing various aspects of Exchange
Server such as managing users, mailboxes, security policies, and
databases as well as monitoring and troubleshooting Exchange Server.
This course will prepare the student for exam 70-662: Configuring
Microsoft Exchange Server which counts as credit toward the
Microsoft Certified IT Professional (MCITP): Enterprise Messaging
Administrator certification. (Special Fee: $39.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
242
Computer Engineering Technology Computer Engineering Technology
CET 2811 4 4 0
MICROSOFT WINDOWS XP PROFESSIONAL
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C or department
approval
This course teaches the student to implement Windows XP
Professional, including automated and remote installations. The
student also will learn to configure the desktop environment – from
user accounts to multiple-language support. The course will cover
installing and supporting hardware devices and drivers. The details of
administering resources such as shared folders, file systems and
network printers will be covered. The student will practice configuring
and troubleshooting network protocols and services including TCP/IP,
Internet Information Services, and remote services. Additional items
such as optimizing memory and processor and application
performance will be covered in detail. The student will be introduced
to security management using Group Policies, Encrypting File Systems
(EFS) and NTFS permissions that will provide the basis for future
courses. The concept of backing up and restoring files, and system
state data will be introduced. (Special Fee: $39.00)
CET 2812C 3 2 2
MICROSOFT SQL SERVER
• Prerequisite: CET 2792C or department approval
This is a hands-on course designed to prepare students for the
challenges of managing/administering Microsoft SQL Server. Main
topics include; install, configure, and maintain SQL Server, SQL Server
security, data management tasks, optimizing server performance, and
implementing high availability. This course prepares the student for
the Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist (MCTS): Microsoft SQL
Server 2008, Implementation and Maintenance designation.
(Special Fee: $39.00)
CET 2830C 3 2 2
INFORMATION ASSURANCE
• Prerequisites: CET 2660C and CET 2792C
This course provides an overview of information security. This handson
course designed to prepare students for the challenges facing
network security. Students will learn information security terminology,
principles of security, and basic types of intrusions. Students are also
introduced to various ways to secure systems that store, process, and
transport information. (Special Fee: $38.00)
CET 2854 3 3 1
WIRELESS NETWORKS
• Prerequisites: CET 2178C and CET 2486C
This introductory course in wireless networks focuses on the design,
planning, implementation, operation and troubleshooting of wireless
networks. It covers a comprehensive overview of technologies,
security, and design best practices with particular emphasis on handson
skills in wireless networks. (Special Fee: $36.00)
CET 2880C 4 2 2
COMPUTER FORENSICS
• Prerequisites: A minimum of grade of C in CET 2660C and
CET 2792C
This course offers a solid foundation to computer forensics
investigations: preparing students to acquire and analyze digital
evidence. The course covers tools and techniques, and explains topics
such as file structure, data recovery, e-mail and network investigations,
and expert witness testimony. In addition the student will gain
practical knowledge in conducting digital investigations and
preserving digital evidence that maybe used in court or corporate
inquiries. (Special Fee: $38.00)
CET 2890C 3 2 2
CYBER SECURITY
• Prerequisites: CET 1610C and CET 2830C
The overarching purpose of this course is to provide information about
the basic workings of firewalls, with a predominant slant toward opensource,
Linux-based firewalls such as IPTABLES, and Firewall Snort.
However, the course will also provide information and practical
knowledge on commercial firewalls. To that effect, smaller appliance
firewalls such as Linksys Firewall will be covered, along with personal
firewalls such as Windows Firewall. Additionally commercial
enterprise firewalls such as Cisco firewalls will be covered. Software
firewalls, integrated firewalls, and appliance firewalls will all be
explored and explained. While it is true that vendors’ firewall products
vary greatly, the fundamental underlying principles do not vary
because of the nature of the technology, and therefore will constitute
the focal point of the course. (Special Fee: $38.00)
CET 2892C 3 2 2
ADVANCED CYBER SECURITY
• Prerequisite: CET 2890C
The overarching objective of this course is to arm the student with the
practical knowledge necessary to integrate the defense-in-depth
strategy, as detailed by the National Security Agency (NSA), in
deploying, hardening, monitoring, and defending critical information
infrastructure. (Special Fee: $38.00)
CET 2894C 3 2 2
PROJECTS IN CYBER SECURITY: CAPSTONE COURSE
• Prerequisites: CET 2880C and CET 2892C or departmental
approval
The overarching objective of this course is to sharpen the student’s
Cyber Defense skills by preparing for and participating in Cyber
Defense competitions at both the regional and national level.
Specifically, students will be able to apply the skills, methodologies,
tools, and practices they learned in previous Cyber Security related
courses to inventory a live network, conduct assessments and needs
analysis, harden information systems, monitor the network
infrastructure, detect and thwart attacks, respond to incidents, and
prepare adequate reports. (Special Fee: $38.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Computer Engineering Technology Computer Engineering Technology
243
CET 2930 1 - 5 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN COMPUTER ENGINEERING
TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in computer engineering technology based on the
needs and areas of interest of the class and professor. May include
laboratory and/or field work as part of the class. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 5 credits, provided
different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $35.00)
CET 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN NETWORKING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including both CET 2179C and CET 2794 or both CET
2179C and CET 2615C. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
CTS 1163C 3 2 2
MICROSOFT WINDOWS 7
• Prerequisite: CET 2179C or CGS 1560
This course will enable the student to install and administer the
Microsoft Windows 7 client operating system. The student will learn
about settings in which the client is installed, and administer it for
various user environments. The student will create and configure user
accounts, plan and manage permissions, and configure the operating
system to use various network services. The student will also backup
and restore system files, manage and update process, troubleshoot
problems, and audit operating system activity. This course will prepare
the student for the Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist (MCTS)
70-680 exam.
Computer Information Technology and
Computer Programming and Analysis
CAP 2023 3 3 0
GAME PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisites: COP 2800 with a C or better and COT 2001 with a
C or better.
Students will learn techniques for programming computer games in 2-
D and 3-D. The games will include real-time user interaction, graphics,
animation, music, and sound effects. 2-D and 3-D object modeling and
rendering will be studied. The games will include 3-D scene
management and player management issues. Students implement their
own video game. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 1060 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTERS
Introduction to major uses of microcomputers for business
applications. Topics covered include computer literacy and the use of
industry-standard software packages for word processing, spreadsheets,
database, and presentation graphics. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 1555 3 3 0
INTERNET WEB ESSENTIALS
This course teaches students how to use Web browsers to access the
services available on the Internet. Topics covered in this course are the
World Wide Web, Internet, electronic mail, Telnet, Gopher, TFTP, legal
issues, privacy, security, and etiquette. Students also will learn how to
create simple basic Web pages. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 1560 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO OPERATING SYSTEMS
This course covers an introduction to operating systems concepts and
basic commands in various common operating systems. Students
completing the course will have a solid understanding of operating
system concepts and will know how to perform basic operations in
several operating systems, on desktop, networked and mainframe
systems. Students will be exposed to current versions of operating
systems including Mac OS, Windows, and UNIX/Linux.
(Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 2091 3 3 0
SOCIAL, LEGAL, AND ETHICAL ISSUES IN INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
An in-depth look at social, legal, and ethical issues related to the
advent of computers and computing in modern society. Critical
thinking skills will be applied to topics related to the information
technology field; for example, privacy vs. access to information,
censorship vs. civil liberties, intellectual property, and cyber-crime, as
well as less controversial issues such as the impact of information on
daily life and the digital divide. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 2100 3 1.5 1.5
COMPUTER FUNDAMENTALS AND APPLICATIONS
This course covers the fundamentals of computers and computer
nomenclature, particularly with respect to personal computer
hardware and software used in today’s business environment. Students
will survey and use business applications programs utilizing prewritten
programs that include word processing, spreadsheets,
databases, presentation graphics, and Web browsers. Students
completing the course will have a solid understanding of computer
concepts, how to use computers in today’s business world, and how to
access information on the World Wide Web. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 2510 3 3 0
SPREADSHEET APPLICATIONS FOR BUSINESS
Students learn how to solve realistic business problems using current
computer spreadsheet software. How to create, modify, and print
worksheets; when to apply various commands, formulas, and
functions; how to create graphics and incorporate them into the
worksheet; how to create a data table, and how to use a database.
(Special Fee: $34.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Computer Engineering Technology Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis
244
CGS 2545 3 3 0
DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Principles of database systems, architecture of database management
systems, relational model conceptual design and requirement analysis,
database design and normalization, query languages, multi-user and
distributed database issues; practical use of a DBMS and building of a
database application. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 2650 1 0 0
SOCIAL NETWORKING FOR JOB SEARCH
This course will teach students to utilize current industry social media
as well as job search techniques related specifically to Information
Technology. Students will explore Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn,
YouTube, and creating a digital portfolio to help find a job.
Students should have some computer competency using the web
and search engines.
CGS 2786 3 3 0
WEB DEVELOPMENT TOOLS
• Prerequisite: COP 2822
This course introduces Web-authoring software applications and
teaches students how to add rich multimedia content to Web pages.
The student demonstrates advanced Web development techniques by
constructing and managing Web sites using a professional editor,
developing and integrating flash movies into a Web-page using an
authoring tool, and creating and editing sophisticated images for the
Web using a graphics program. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CGS 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN COMPUTER STUDIES
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including knowledge of at least one computer language
or database management system. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
CIS 2910 3 4 0
IT CAPSTONE
• Prerequisite: Departmental approval
This course is designed for IT students who have completed a
significant portion of their degree course work. Students will use their
knowledge of IT concepts to complete a comprehensive project
including a detailed project plan, implementation, documentation, and
final presentation. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CIS 2930 1 - 5 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Selected topics in computer information systems based on the needs
and areas of interest of the class and the professor. May include
laboratory and/or field work as part of the class. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 10 credits provided
different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CIS 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including COP courses. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
CIS 2943 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN COMPUTER INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including COP 2822, and 3 credits from the CIT Electives
List; and Internship Office approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
COP 1000 (Formerly COP 1006) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO PROGRAMMING CONCEPTS
A hands-on introduction to analyzing, designing, coding, and testing
computer programs. Students will develop algorithms for problem
solving with an emphasis on good programming practices. Students
will use programming techniques including control structures, arrays,
and subprograms to design and code basic programs using a modern
computer language. Other topics include working with data, number
systems, and an introduction to object-oriented and event-driven
programming. This course prepares students for software development
courses in programming and web development. Students with a
demonstrated background in computer programming (transcript, job
experience, or waiver exam) may request to have this course waived as
a prerequisite to subsequent courses through the department office
(Special Fee: $34.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis
245
COP 1332 3 3 0
VISUAL BASIC PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 1000
Study of the Visual Basic programming language with an emphasis on
developing good programming practices. Topics include creating a
graphical user interface, working with objects and events, decision and
repetition structures, debugging and error handling, using multiple
forms, data manipulation techniques, and an introduction to working
with databases. Students will construct applications designed to run in
a Windows environment. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 1812 3 3 0
XML AND WEB SERVICES
• Prerequisite: COP 2822
This course explains and demonstrates Extensible Markup Language
(XML). XML-based Web services are also covered. XML is platform
independent and versatile. This course teaches how to use XML in data
exchange applications on the Web, for e-commerce and in N-Tier
architectures, by explaining XML theory reinforced with practical
examples and real-life solutions. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2220 3 3 0
C PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 1000
Hands-on study of C Programming language as applied to business and
scientific applications. Good programming practices and problem
solving with procedural programming will be emphasized. Topics
include data types, control structures, arrays, pointers, functions, I/O,
structs and unions. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2222 3 3 0
ADVANCED C PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 2220
Continuation of C programming covering advanced data structures,
including arrays, pointers, pointers to pointers, linked lists, binary
trees, stacks, and hash tables. Also covers text and binary file I/O.
(Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2224 3 3 0
C++ PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 2220
Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) using C++
programming language. Covers class hierarchies and single, repeated,
and multiple inheritance. Focuses on abstraction and information
hiding. Covers in detail polymorphism and dynamic binding.
(Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2341 3 3 0
LINUX SHELL SCRIPTING
An introduction to the Linux operating system. Topics include the
history and philosophy of the Linux operating system, the file system,
commands and files processing, multitasking, editors, shells, shell
scripting, window systems and utilities. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2360 3 3 0
C# PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 1000
A hands-on study of the Microsoft Visual C# programming language
with emphasis on object-oriented programming. Topics include control
structures, methods, arrays, exception handling and inheritance.
Students will develop C# programs in both console and windows
modes. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2654 3 3 0
iOS APP DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisites: COP 2224; or COP 2360; or COP 2800
Hands-on application development for iOS devices including the
iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad. Apps will be written in Objective C using
Xcode, and execute in an emulator. Topics include the application
architecture, user interface, data persistence, graphics, multimedia,
and location-based services. Advanced apps will communicate with
device sensors including the accelerometer, microphone and camera.
The business of app development is explored, including distributing
and marketing in App Store. Owning an iOS device is not required.
Use of a Macintosh computer for development is required. On-campus
computers are available for students who do not own a Macintosh.
COP 2660 3 3 0
ANDROID APP DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in COP 2800
Hands-on application development for Android devices. Native
Android apps will be written in Java, and execute in an emulator.
Topics include the application architecture, user interface, data
persistence, graphics, multimedia, and location-based services.
Advanced apps will communicate with device sensors including the
accelerometer, microphone and camera. The business of app
development is explored, including distributing and marketing in the
Android Market. Owning an Android device is not required.
COP 2800 3 3 0
JAVA PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 1000 or
department approval
A hands-on course in programming with the Java language for students
who have completed a course in programming concepts or have some
other programming experience. Students will create Java applications
with emphasis on correct object-oriented programming techniques
and will become familiar with object-oriented design, including the
creation of classes in Java and the use of existing classes as provided in
the current version of Java API. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2805 3 3 0
ADVANCED JAVA PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 2800
A continuation of COP 2800. Advanced topics in Java SE (Standard
Edition), including Graphical User Interface using Swing, event
handling, file input/output, collections, multi-threaded applications,
and database connectivity. Object-oriented design and analysis is
introduced using the Unified Modeling Language (UML).
(Special Fee: $34.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis
246
COP 2821 3 3 0
ADVANCED MICROSOFT APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in COP 1332 or COP 2360 or
department approval
This course is designed for students who have experience working with
a current version of a Microsoft programming language such as C# or
Visual Basic. Students will learn advanced programming concepts for
software development in the Windows environment. Topics will
include an in-depth presentation of the .NET framework and coverage
of significant object-oriented concepts. Additional topics include
working with client/server databases. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2822 3 3 0
WEB SITE DEVELOPMENT
The student will learn to construct web pages containing animated
graphics, forms, frames, style sheets, XML, and Dynamic HTML. The
course will also cover the software tools available to create web pages,
as well as the hardware and software requirements for setting up a web
site. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2823 3 3 0
ADVANCED MICROSOFT WEB DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in COP 2822 and either
COP 1332 or COP 2360
This course focuses on creating dynamic Web applications using
server-side programming technologies. Students will use the latest
version of Active Server Pages (ASP) for the design and
implementation of Web site data support. Topics include managing
data sources and building data-driven Web applications. This is a
hands-on course requiring all students to implement code for the
client-side and server-side of the Web page. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2830 3 3 0
SCRIPTING LANGUAGES
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in COP 1000 and COP 2822
or department approval
The syntax and semantics of scripting programming language will be
covered. Covers major scripting languages in current use. Students will
learn to write scripting language code, integrate the scripts into Web
pages, and identify different uses and applications of scripts in Web
sites and/or other multimedia projects. (Special Fee: $34.00)
COP 2930 1 - 5 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN COMPUTER PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in computer programming based on the needs and
areas of interest of the class and the professor. May include laboratory
and/or field work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 10 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $34.00)
COT 2001 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO MATH AND PHYSICS FOR GAME
PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: COP 1000 with a grade of C or higher
This course teaches students the math and physics needed to program
an interactive video game. Topics studied include: Geometry and
trigonometry for collision detection and motion of graphical objects,
limits, tangents, vectors, parametric equations, and real world physics
of movement necessary for creating a realistic video game experience.
COT 2104 3 3 0
FOUNDATIONS OF DISCRETE MATHEMATICS
• Prerequisite: MAC 1105 or department approval
This course builds basic mathematical logic skills and foundations of
discrete mathematics. Topics include statements, truth tables and
tautologies, arguments, rules of demonstrations, conditional
demonstrations and indirect proof, logic of quantifiers, algebra of sets,
definitions and axioms of set theory; informal proof, relations and
functions, mathematical induction, strings and other topics in discrete
mathematics. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CTS 1120 (Formerly CIS 1354) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO NETWORK SECURITY
• Prerequisite: CTS 1134C
This course covers a broad overview of security topics related to
information security including: cryptography, security baselines, and
current attack and counter attack methods. The course covers
methods to secure communications, Web security and hardening the
network infrastructure. It also teaches the student to develop
comprehensive security and management policies. It looks at both
Windows and Linux security techniques for hardening the operating
system. The objectives of this course are mapped to Comptia’s
Security+ Certification Exam. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CTS 1131C 3 3 1
COMPUTER MAINTENANCE ESSENTIALS
Provides detailed information on computer hardware, operating
systems and networks. Students learn to install, configure, upgrade and
replace computer system components; troubleshoot and upgrade
hardware and peripherals; install, administer, troubleshoot and secure
Windows and Linux operating systems; implement and secure a small
network. At the end of this course students are prepared to take the
CompTIA A+ certification examinations. (Special Fee: $46.00)
CTS 1134C 3 3 1
NETWORK ESSENTIALS
This course introduces networking concepts and terminology,
including Data Communications and Network Services, OSI Model,
Network Topologies, Network Media, Connectivity Devices and
Security. At the end of this course students are prepared to take the
CompTIA Network+ certification examination. (Special Fee: $ 46.00)
247
Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
CTS 1142 3 3 0
INFORMATION TECHNLOGY PROJECT MGMT.
• Prerequisite: CGS 2100
This course will enable the student to use a variety of project
management techniques that can be applied in an information
technology project context. The student will gain knowledge in the
areas of integration management, scope management, time
management, cost management, and quality management, which will
serve as a foundation for an information technology project
management position. This course maps to the objectives of
CompTIA’s Project+ certification and the Project Management
Institute’s Project Management Professional certification exams.
CTS 1155 (Formerly CIS 1417) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO CUSTOMER SERVICE AND HELP DESK
CONCEPTS
This course is designed to provide individuals interested in a technical
customer support career with the knowledge and skills to be successful
in that field. This course will introduce the business, technical, and
interpersonal skills needed to provide customer support. Students will
gain a better understanding of the various careers in the customer
support industry and the knowledge and skill sets needed to enter and
advance in those careers. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CTS 1156 (Formerly CIS 1416) 3 3 0
HELP DESK TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGIES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CIS 1155 or department
approval
This course is designed to provide individuals considering career
opportunities in a technical support group with a better understanding
of some of the available technology in a support environment and to
provide hands-on experience with some of the technologies and tools
found in many support groups. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CTS 2317 (Formerly CIS 2355) 3 3 0
ADVANCED NETWORK SECURITY
• Prerequisite: CIS 1354 or CTS 1120
This course covers Network Defense and Counter measures and the
fundamentals of defending networks, such as the layered defense and
defense in depth strategies. The course demonstrates the use of
firewalls, ISA servers, VPNs, and IDS. The course also develops and
examines risk analysis and security policies to help build a secure
network. The course deals with both Windows and Linux Operating
Systems. The objective of this course is mapped to the Security
Certified Network Professional, Network and Defense
Countermeasures Exam. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CTS 2321 (Formerly COP 2345) 3 3 0
LINUX SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION
• Prerequisite: COP 2341
This course on the Linux operating system covers the topics required
for the CompTIA Linux+ Certification Exam. It builds on concepts of
the Linux operating system covered in COP 2341. Topics include
planning a Linux implementation, installation, configuration,
administration, system maintenance, troubleshooting, and system
hardware. (Special Fee: $34.00)
CTS 2433 (Formerly COP 2705) 4 4 0
SQL SERVER DATABASE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
• Prerequisite: CGS 2545 or department approval
This course teaches the student how to develop a logical data model,
how to create databases, database files, and objects; space
management and growth strategies. The student will use Transact SQL
and Data Transformation Services to manipulate data and extract data
in XML format. Programming business logic using stored procedures,
transactions, triggers, user-defined functions and views also are
covered. The student will learn to optimize database performance by
using SQL Profiler and the Index Tuning Wizard. Security management
will be covered from the viewpoint of data access, object-level security
and application rolls. (Special Fee: $34.00)
Criminal Justice Institute
To register for any of the Criminal Justice Institute courses, you must
apply and be accepted to a Criminal Justice Institute program.
Courses offered through the Criminal Justice Institute may have
different contact hours in different programs.
CORRECTIONS
CJK 0031 40
FIRST AID FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICERS
This course prepares prospective officers to apply first aid knowledge
and techniques to emergency situations. Adult, child and infant CPR
is included.
CJK 0040 80
CRIMINAL JUSTICE FIREARMS
This course provides instruction in the use of handgun, shotgun and
rifle. Safety procedures and ammunition use are also covered. Practical
exercises are conducted on the firing range.
CJK 0051 80
CRIMINAL JUSTICE DEFENSIVE TACTICS
This course of instruction includes the techniques used for an officer's
personal safety and those necessary to subdue, search and transport
resisting individuals. The use of restraining devices, impact weapons
and pressure points are covered.
CJK 0100 (Formerly 0773) 62
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS I
The needs of various groups within society are addressed including
juveniles, elderly, ethnic, cultural, mentally ill, retarded, physically
handicapped and substance abusers. Community relations and
common courtesy will be discussed. Intervention techniques for
suicide, domestic violence, and other crisis are reviewed. Stress
recognition and reduction are included.
Computer Information Tech and Computer Programming and Analysis Criminal Justice Institute
248
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Course Con
CJK 0101 (Formerly CJD 0750) 50
INTERPERSONAL SKILLS II
Verbal and nonverbal communication is explored with emphasis
placed on task accomplishment, understanding verbal communication
correctly, and reinforcing positive and negative behavior. Also
discussed are topics on supervision techniques, inmate societies,
homosexuality, and human adjustment to imprisonment.
CJK 0102 (Formerly CJD 0752) 64
CORRECTIONAL OPERATIONS
An overview of daily operations within a correctional facility are
discussed to include: intake procedures, fingerprinting, disciplinary
procedures, inmate movement, release procedures and key control.
CJK 0270 (Formerly CJD 0770) 46
CRIMINAL JUSTICE LEGAL I
This course provides the student with an introductory overview of the
criminal justice system and a history of law. The foundation and basic
components of law are studied with specific focus upon officer
application. Court procedure and testimony are examined.
CJK 0285 22
CRIMINAL JUSTICE LEGAL II
Constitutional law and its application to the public and officers are
examined. Law including evidence procedures, arrest law, search and
seizure and various statutory laws that are common to police and
correctional officers are studied. Elements of various crimes, civil law
and civil and criminal liability of officers are covered.
CJK 0286 42
CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMUNICATIONS
The student will learn the report writing process from the interview,
statement taking, note taking and the final report product with
practical exercises included. The difference between interviewing and
interrogation is explored. Interpersonal communication skills are
covered along with radio and telephone procedures.
CJK 0280 40
CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICER PHYSICAL FITNESS TRAINING
The student will participate in various physical exercises, including
stretching, calisthenics and running in preparation for Defensive
Tactics Training.
CJK 0480 26
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Potential types of emergency situations that may occur within a
correctional facility are examined and which action should be taken.
Hostage situations, hazardous material, unusual occurrences, and riots
will also be covered.
ELECTIVE COURSE:
CJD 0939 24
CRIMINAL JUSTICE EXAM REVIEW
An overview is given which helps prepare the student for the
state exam.
LAW ENFORCEMENT
CJK 0007 11
INTRODUCTION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
This course provides an overview of the academy program and the
Criminal Justice system in Florida.
CJK 0008 69
LAW ENFORCEMENT LEGAL
This course provides instruction on the history of the American legal
system. Constitutional law, search and seizure, law of arrest, elements of
crimes, civil and criminal liability, and its application to the public and
officers are examined.
CJK 0011 40
LAW ENFORCEMENT HUMAN ISSUES
The needs of various groups within society are addressed including
elderly, ethnic, cultural, mentally ill, retarded, physically handicapped,
and substance abusers.
CJK 0017 76
LAW ENFORCEMENT COMMUNICATIONS
The student will learn the report writing process from the interview,
statement taking, note taking, and the final report product.
Interpersonal communication skills are covered along with use of
telecommunications.
CJK 0020 48
LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE OPERATIONS
The components of the police driving environment are explored.
Practical exercises are conducted on the driving range.
CJK 0031 40
FIRST AID FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICERS
This course prepares prospective officers to apply first aid knowledge
and techniques to emergency situations. Adult, child and infant CPR is
included.
CJK 0040 80
CRIMINAL JUSTICE FIREARMS
This course provides instruction in the use of handgun, shotgun and
rifle. Safety procedures and ammunition use are also covered. Practical
exercises are conducted on the firing range.
CJK 0051 80
CMS CRIMINAL JUSTICE DEFENSIVE TACTICS
This course of instruction includes the techniques used for an officer's
personal safety and those necessary to subdue, search, and transport
resisting individuals. The use of restraining devices, impact weapons,
and pressure points are covered.
Course Con Course Con
Criminal Justice Institute Criminal Justice Institute
249
CJK 0061 58
LAW ENFORCEMENT PATROL I
In this course, the student addresses the daily skills and techniques
needed by officers to perform patrol tactics and respond to various
types of calls. Methods of approach to various high-risk situations are
explored with practical exercises included.
CJK 0062 40
LAW ENFORCEMENT PATROL II
This course provides the student with the skills to respond to hazardous
materials incidents, bomb threats, building evacuations, and weapons of
mass destruction. The students are introduced to the existence and
activities of criminal gangs and extremist groups.
CJK 0071 56
LAW ENFORCEMENT CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
The student will learn methods for investigating various crimes,
including domestic violence, child abuse, elderly abuse, missing
persons, human trafficking, robbery, burglary, narcotics, and death.
CJK 0076 24
LAW ENFORCEMENT CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATIONS
This block addresses skills for conducting investigations, including
crime scene management, evidence collection, identifying victims,
witnesses, suspects, and preparing crime scene reports.
CJK 0082 24
LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAFFIC STOPS
The student will learn legal issues and traffic law, professional traffic
stops and discriminatory profiling, unknown risks of traffic stops, and
the identification, initiation, and application of tactical approaches to
high risk traffic stops.
CJK 0083 24
LAW ENFORCEMENT DUI TRAFFIC STOPS
This course provides an overview of the DUI problem, DUI detection,
drug-impaired driving, the Standardized Field Sobriety Tests, and DUI
report writing. Legal issues regarding DUI traffic stops are also
discussed.
CJK 0086 32
LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAFFIC CRASH INVESTIGATIONS
Traffic accident investigation, scene management, evidence handling,
and reporting procedures are reviewed.
CJK 0096 60
CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICER PHYSICAL FITNESS
The student will participate in various physical exercises, including
stretching, calisthenics, and running in preparation for Defensive
Tactics Training.
CJK 0240 27
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUXILIARY INTRODUCTION
This course provides an overview of basic administrative, legal,
communications, and human issues for students seeking a position as a
Law Enforcement Volunteer and is a prerequisite course for
certification as a Law Enforcement Auxiliary Officer.
CJK 0241 19
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUXILIARY PATROL AND TRAFFIC
This course provides an overview of patrol techniques, crowd control,
traffic stops, and traffic crash investigations for students seeking a
position as a law enforcement volunteer and is a prerequisite course
for certification for a Law Enforcement Auxiliary Officer.
CJK 0242 17
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUXILIARY INVESTIGATIONS
This course provides an overview of basic criminal investigations for
students seeking a position as a law enforcement volunteer and is a
prerequisite course for certification for a Law Enforcement
Auxiliary Officer.
CJK 0422 8
DART FIRING STUN GUN
This course will introduce the student to the basics of the dart-firing
stun gun and provide the fundamental knowledge on this emerging
tool in Criminal Justice.
ELECTIVE COURSE:
CJD 0939 24
CRIMINAL JUSTICE EXAM REVIEW
An overview is given which helps prepare the student for the
state exam.
CROSSOVER: CORRECTIONS
TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
CJK 0020 48
LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE OPERATIONS
• Prerequisite: Correctional Officer Basic Recruit Program
The components of the police driving environment are explored.
Practical exercises are conducted on the driving range.
CJK 0212 8
CROSSOVER: HIGH LIABILITY
• Prerequisite: Correctional Officer Basic Recruit Program
This course focuses on law enforcement high liability areas including
basic first aid, firearms safety procedures, use of deadly force, and
basic handling procedure for various weapons.
CJK 0221 47
CORRECTIONAL CROSSOVER TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
INTRODUCTION AND LEGAL
The student will learn criminal justice values and ethics, and a variety
of legal issues that are applicable to law enforcement: probable cause,
search and seizure, lawful arrests, interrogation of suspects, elements
of arrests, rules of evidence, use of force, criminal liability, and civil
liability. The legal considerations when dealing with juveniles is also
discussed in this course.
Criminal Justice Technology Criminal Justice Technology
250
Course Con Course Con
CJK 0222 56
CORRECTIONAL CROSSOVER TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
COMMUNICATIONS
The student will learn the use of radio equipment and how to
gather information at crime scenes, conduct basic interviews,
take statements, and organize and document information in
reports. Students will write reports and complete an arrest/probable
cause affidavit.
CJK 0223 32
CORRECTIONAL CROSSOVER TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
HUMAN ISSUES
The student will learn how to respond to, and identify a person in
crisis while providing the most appropriate intervention. The student
will also learn to recognize the signs and symptoms of a suicidal
individual, an individual that has disabilities, and substance abuse.
The assessment of juveniles and the elderly are reviewed.
CJK 0422 8
DART FIRING STUN GUN
This course will introduce the student to the basics of the dart-firing
stun gun and provide fundamental knowledge on this emerging tool in
criminal justice.
ELECTIVE COURSE:
CJD 0939 20
CRIMINAL JUSTICE EXAM REVIEW
An overview is given which helps prepare the student for the
state exam.
AUXILIARY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
CJK 0040 80
CRIMINAL JUSTICE FIREARMS
This course provides instruction in the use of handgun, shotgun and
rifle. Safety procedures and ammunition use are also covered. Practical
exercises are conducted on the firing range.
CJK 0051 80
CRIMINAL JUSTICE DEFENSIVE TACTICS
This course of instruction includes the techniques used for an officer's
personal safety and those necessary to subdue, search and transport
resisting individuals. The use of restraining devices, impact weapons
and pressure points are covered.
CJK 0240 27
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUXILIARY INTRODUCTION
This course provides an overview of basic administrative, legal,
communications, and human issues for students seeking a position as a
Law Enforcement Volunteer and is a prerequisite course for
certification as a Law Enforcement Auxiliary Officer.
CJK 0241 19
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUXILIARY PATROL AND TRAFFIC
This course provides an overview of patrol techniques, crowd control,
traffic stops, and traffic crash investigations for students seeking a
position as a law enforcement volunteer and is a prerequisite course
for certification for a Law Enforcement Auxiliary Officer.
CJK 0242 17
LAW ENFORCEMENT AUXILIARY INVESTIGATIONS
This course provides an overview of basic criminal investigations for
students seeking a position as a law enforcement volunteer and is a
prerequisite course for certification for a Law Enforcement
Auxiliary Officer.
CJK 0422 8
DART FIRING STUN GUN
This course will introduce the student to the basics of the dart-firing
stun gun and provide fundamental knowledge on this emerging tool in
criminal justice.
ELECTIVE COURSE:
CJK 0020 48
LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE OPERATIONS
The components of the police driving environment are explored.
Practical exercises are conducted on the driving range.
251
Criminal Justice Technology Criminal Justice Technology
Course Con Course Con
Criminal Justice Technology
College Credit
CCJ 1010 3 3 0
CRIMINOLOGY
Study of nature and extent of crime and delinquency, causes and
explanations of criminal behavior and rationale of crime control and
treatment in United States. This course includes learning activity
designed to ensure competence in the basic use of computers.
CCJ 1020 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO CRIMINAL JUSTICE
Introduction to, and overview of, history, philosophy and operations of
criminal justice system.
CCJ 2022 3 3 0
CONTEMPORARY ISSUES IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE
Discussion and examination of current issues and problems of interest
and concern to criminal justice system.
CCJ 2452 3 3 0
CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CCJ 1020
Introduction of the fundamentals of criminal justice organization,
management and administration. In addition to other concepts,
students will be exposed to policy/procedure and control of various
criminal justice agencies (ranging from local to state to federal levels
and from small to large).
CCJ 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE
For students interested in exploring further special criminal justice
topics through research, discussions and observations. Topics selected
from areas of law enforcement, corrections, courts and loss
prevention. Students may earn from one to three credits each time
course is offered. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 9 credits, provided different topic explored each time,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
CCJ 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION/FIELD OBSERVATION IN CRIMINAL
JUSTICE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 30
credits, which include 15 credits of criminal justice courses; and
Program Director’s approval.
This course is a planned work-based experience that allows students to
observe practical workplace application of classroom theory which is
evaluated and processed in a classroom setting. In addition, the
student will learn ethical and procedural requirements of observation
within a criminal justice setting. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
CJC 2000 (Formerly CCJ 2300) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO CORRECTIONS
Introductory study of corrections to provide students with an overall
view of the nature, philosophy, operations and goals of secure and
non-secure correctional institutions.
CJC 2162 (Formerly CCJ 2330) 3 3 0
COMMUNITY CORRECTIONS
Overview of probation and its process, parole and community-based
corrections programs which are alternatives to corrections.
CJE 2000 (Formerly CCJ 2100) 3 3 0
POLICING SYSTEMS AND PROCEDURES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in CCJ 1020
This course will provide an overview and examination of the function,
organization and various methods of policing in the United States.
CJE 2003 (Formerly CCJ 2110, CCJ 2102, and CJE 2110) 1 1 0
CAREER CHOICES IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE
This course exposes the student to the diversity of requirements,
needs, and career opportunities within the criminal justice system
and related fields. It covers various job search strategies and the
preparation of résumés. Students participate in mock job interviews.
This course includes learning activity designed to ensure competence
in the basic use of computers.
CJE 2140 (Formerly CCJ 2802) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO SECURITY
This course will explore various aspects of security, including, but not
limited to, community, retail, corporate, business and industrial
problems and concerns. In addition, governmental and legal aspects of
security will be examined.
CJE 2160 (Formerly CCJ 2122, CCJ 2130) 3 3 0
MULTICULTURAL LAW ENFORCEMENT
This course examines various strategies for peace keeping by law
enforcement in today's diverse multicultural society. It is designed to
assist students in understanding the pervasive influences of culture,
race, and ethnicity in the workplace and in the communities that law
enforcement serves.
CJE 2600 (Formerly CJT 2110) 3 3 0
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION
Recording crime scene, collecting and preserving evidence.
Familiarizes students with police crime laboratory and interview and
interrogation theories.
CJJ 2001 (Formerly CCJ 2500) 3 3 0
JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEMS
Introduction and overview of juvenile justice systems in regards to the
treatment, images, explanation, prevention and context of delinquency
within the criminal justice system.
CJL 2100 (Formerly CCJ 2210) 3 3 0
CRIMINAL LAW
This course examines crime and the elements of offenses. Various
mental states, capacities to commit crimes, and defenses to criminal
liability are intensely studied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Criminal Justice Technology Criminal Justice Technology
252
CJL 2102 (Formerly CCJ 2220) 3 3 0
CRIMINAL EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURES
This course reviews the rules of evidence, methods of legally collecting
and preserving evidence, rules and procedures regulating admissibility
of evidence and presentation of evidence in court. Special emphasis is
placed on constitutional issues of search and seizure and procedures.
DSC 1006 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO HOMELAND SECURITY
This course will introduce students to the vocabulary and important
components of Homeland Security. Students will learn about the
agencies associated with Homeland Security and their inter-related
duties and relationships. Students will examine historical events that
impact Homeland Security. Students will explore state, national, and
international laws impacting Homeland Security and students will
examine the most critical threats confronting Homeland Security.
DSC 2242 3 3 0
TRANSPORTATION AND BORDER SECURITY
• Prerequisite: DSC 1006 or department approval
Students will understand issues related to modern border and
transportation security. Specific topics will include security for
seaports, ships, aircraft, trains, trucks, pipelines, buses, etc. Students
will learn about the technology needed to detect terrorists and their
weapons, as well as understand the legal, economic, political, and
cultural aspects of the problem.
DSC 2590 3 3 0
INTELLIGENCE ANALYSIS AND SECURITY MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: DSC 1006 or department approval
This course examines intelligence analysis and its indispensable
relationship to the security management of terrorist attacks,
man-made disasters and natural disasters. It also explores
vulnerabilities of our national defense and private sectors, as well as
the threats posed to these institutions by terrorists, man-made
disasters, and natural disasters. Students will discuss substantive
issues regarding intelligence support of homeland security measures
implemented by the United States and explore how the intelligence
community operates.
Culinary Management
See Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Management, Culinary
Management, and Restaurant Management for course descriptions.
Dance
DAA 1100 2 3 0
MODERN DANCE I
Basic theory and practice in using body movements to express or
demonstrate ideas or thoughts. Broadens knowledge of rhythms, music
and self-expression through the medium of movement. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 1101 2 3 0
MODERN DANCE II
• Prerequisite: DAA 1100 or department approval
Further development of modern dance techniques, rhythms, music
and self-expression. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit
for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 1104 1 3 0
MODERN DANCE I FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance Performance
Basic theory and practice in using body movements to express or
demonstrate ideas or thoughts. Broadens knowledge of rhythms, music
and self-expression through the medium of movement. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 1105 1 3 0
MODERN DANCE II FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1104 or department approval
Further development of modern dance techniques, rhythms, music
and self-expression. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit
for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 1160 1 3 0
MODERN DANCE III FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: DAA 1104 and DAA 1105 or department approval
Students will refine modern dance technique through assimilation,
accuracy, application and recall. Performance techniques and
knowledge of modern dance technique through choreographic works
will be explored. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit
for a maximum of 4 credit hours, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied.
DAA 1200 2 3 0
BALLET I
Basic techniques at the barre using basic foot, arm and body positions.
Center floor work covers basic adagio movements and allegro
combinations and uses classical sequences for traveling across the
floor. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1201 2 3 0
BALLET II
• Prerequisite: DAA 1200 or department approval
Student experiences an intensification of barre and center floor work.
Students are introduced to eight body directions with corresponding
arms and body alignment, pirouettes and the use of beats. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Criminal Justice Technology Dance
253
DAA 1204 1 3 0
BALLET I FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance Performance
Basic techniques at the barre using classical feet, arm and body
positions. Center floor work covers basic adagio movements and
allegro combinations using sequences for traveling across the floor.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4
credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1205 1 3 0
BALLET II FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1204 or department approval
Student experiences an intensification of barre and center floor work.
Students are introduced to eight body directions with corresponding
arms and body alignment, pirouettes and use of beats. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1220 2 3 0
POINTE I
• Prerequisite: DAA 1200 or DAA 1201 or department approval
Students further their classical ballet skills by developing technique
and strength en pointe. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1221 2 3 0
POINTE II
• Prerequisite: DAA 1220 or department approval
Continuation of DAA 1220 with further emphasis on strength and
technique en pointe. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit
for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1330 2 3 0
AFRICAN DANCE I
Students are introduced to the cultural traditions of African,
Caribbean and related world dance forms. Multiple credit course. May
be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $25.00)
DAA 1331 2 3 0
AFRICAN DANCE II
• Prerequisite: DAA 1330 or department approval
Further development of African Dance I, including a heightened
appreciation of cultural and/or tribal dance variations of Africa and
the Caribbean. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
DAA 1520 2 3 0
TAP I
This course is an introduction to the fundamentals of tap dance.
Students will study rhythm, direction and coordination with an
emphasis on the basic elements of tap technique, combinations and
routines. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1521 2 3 0
TAP II
• Prerequisite: DAA 1520 or department approval
Continuation of DAA 1520, intensifying tap combinations and routines.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4
credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 1650 1 3 0
DANCE PRODUCTION FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: (DAA 1104 or DAA 1100) and (DAA 1204 or
DAA 1200) and selection through audition or department
approval
Students rehearse and perform choreography created by faculty
members and/or guest artists. May include additional rehearsals away
from campus. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $60.00)
DAA 1680 1-3 3-4 0
REPERTORY I FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1104 or DAA 1204 or department
approval
The study and practice of selected works of dance repertory through
rehearsal and performance. Students will explore the progression of
the rehearsal process to the performance experience through various
repertory dance works. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $60.00)
DAA 1681 1-3 3-4 0
REPERTORY II FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to the A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1680 or department approval
Continuation of DAA 1680. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $60.00)
DAA 2102 2 3 0
INTERMEDIATE MODERN DANCE I
• Prerequisite: DAA 1101 or department approval
Intensification of theory and practice in using body movements to
express or demonstrate ideas or thoughts. Increase knowledge of
rhythms, music and dynamics. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $25.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
254
Dance Dance
DAA 2103 2 3 0
INTERMEDIATE MODERN DANCE II
• Prerequisite: DAA 2102 or department approval
Further development of Intermediate Modern Dance I. Analysis of
discipline expanded. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit
for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
DAA 2106 1 3 0
INTERMEDIATE MODERN DANCE I FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1105 or department approval
Intensification of theory and practice in using body movements to
express or demonstrate ideas or thoughts and to increase knowledge of
rhythms, music and dynamics. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 2107 1 3 0
INTERMEDIATE MODERN DANCE II FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 2106 or department approval
Further development of DAA 2106. Analysis of discipline expanded.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4
credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 2202 2 3 0
INTERMEDIATE BALLET I
• Prerequisite: DAA 1201 or department approval
This course provides an intermediate/advanced level in the discipline
of ballet. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
DAA 2203 2 3 0
INTERMEDIATE BALLET II
• Prerequisite: DAA 2202 or department approval
This course provides an intermediate/advanced level in the discipline
of ballet. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
DAA 2206 1 3 0
BALLET III FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1205 or department approval
• Corequisite: DAA 1680 or DAA 1681
Students refine barre and center floor work. Integration of alignment,
physicality, theory, dynamics, musicality and enhanced technical
movements necessary to further the performance experience. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 2207 1 3 0
INTERMEDIATE BALLET I FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 1205 or department approval
This course provides an intermediate/advanced level in the discipline
of ballet. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 2219 1 3 0
INTERMEDIATE BALLET II FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and either DAA 2207 or department approval
Intensification of theory and practice in an intermediate/advanced
level in the discipline of ballet. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 2500 (Formerly DAA 2209) 2 3 0
JAZZ DANCE I
Student learns coordinated movements with isolated parts of body
while using jazz style of dance. Basic routines choreographed to
various genres of music. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 2501 2 3 0
JAZZ DANCE II
• Prerequisite: DAA 2500 or department approval
Continuation of DAA 2500. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $15.00)
DAA 2610 3 3 0
DANCE COMPOSITION AND IMPROVISATION I
FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to the A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and DAA 1104 or DAA 1204 or department approval
This course includes the analysis of dance movement through the art
of choreography. Students will experience movement imagery
designed to develop the dancer’s imagination and will explore basic
spatial, rhythmic and dynamic materials through individual and group
studies. The course includes introductory study of various
choreographic approaches and movement explorations involving
writing, demonstrating and critiquing various art movements and
styles, music theory, musical forms and notations and the dance
environment in relation to theatre. In addition, students will research
and present a choreographic and written analysis of U.S. and world
history dance explorations, and the effects of psychological
experiences communicated through movement will be explored.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $20.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Dance Dance
255
DAA 2611 3 3 0
DANCE COMPOSITION AND IMPROVISATION II
FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to the A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and DAA 2610
Students will further experience the process of choreographic tools,
improvisational exercise and individual and group commentary. Each
assignment is created to develop personal style and individual creative
study. Students will explore the inspiration for creating dance by
improvising movement and the use of imagery as a source for dance
studies. Students will also study musical history and utilize various
periods of musical development for their works. Students will further
their knowledge of dance forms with experimentations in nontraditional
dance settings and will learn how to relate movement to
various artistic forms such as art, literature, photography and
architecture as material for dance. The course will culminate in a
major work choreographed by each student. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
DAA 2682 1 3 0
PERFORMANCE ENSEMBLE: VALENCIA DANCE THEATRE
FOR PRE-MAJORS
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to A.A. Pre-Major: Dance
Performance and selection through audition and department
approval
Students rehearse and perform choreography created by faculty
members and/or guest artists for the experience in a dance company.
This course provides performance growth and development through
performance experiences on campus and in the community. May
include additional rehearsals away from campus. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $60.00)
DAA 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN DANCE
Selected topics in dance based on the needs and areas of interest of
the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as
part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $25.00)
DAA 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN DANCE PERFORMANCE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including DAA 1101 (Modern Dance II) or DAA 1201 (Ballet
II). The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their educational plans. Each
earned credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of
work. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4
credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied . (Internship Fee $10)
DAA 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN DANCE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including DAA 1101 and DAA 1201 and either DAA 2500 or
DAA 2501. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Dental Hygiene
To register for any of the Dental Hygiene courses, you must apply and
be accepted to the Dental Hygiene program.
DEH 1003 3 3 0
FUNDAMENTALS OF DENTAL HYGIENE
• Prerequisites: DES 1020 and DES 1020L
• Corequisites: DEH 1003L, DES 1800, and DES 1800L
This course is designed to provide the student with knowledge of the
basic principles of instrumentation and instrument design. The
concepts of oral health and disease are introduced, with emphasis on
prevention through biofilm control methods.
DEH 1003L 2 0 6
DENTAL HYGIENE INSTRUMENTATION
• Corequisites: DEH 1003, DES 1800, and DES 1800L
Designed for the student to apply basic principles of instrumentation,
instrument design, and fundamental dental hygiene skills in a clinical
setting. Students perform clinical procedures on student partners and
mannequins to develop instrumentation and other clinical skills.
(Special Fee: $515.00)
DEH 1130 2 2 0
ORAL HISTOLOGY AND EMBRYOLOGY
• Corequisites: DEH 1800 and DEH 1800L
Detailed study of dental and oral tissues. Includes early embryonic
development of the face and oral cavity; histology of the teeth.
DEH 1602 1 1 0
PERIODONTOLOGY I
• Prerequisites: DEH 1003 and DEH 1003L
Presents the tissues of the periodontium and the effects of gingival and
periodontal disease processes. Includes disease classification, clinical
assessment and treatment planning for disease management.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
256
Dance Dental Hygiene
DEH 1800 2 2 0
DENTAL HYGIENE I
• Prerequisites: DES 1100, DES 1100L, DES 1800, DES 1800L, DEH
1003, DEH 1003L, DES 1200, and DES 1200L.
• Corequisite: DEH 1800L
Continuation of DEH 1003 with advanced topics including ultrasonic
instrumentation, root debridement, treatment planning, recall,
instrument sharpening, and desensitization of root surfaces, air
abrasive polishing, topical anesthesia and syringe preparation.
DEH 1800L 5 0 15
CLINICAL DENTAL HYGIENE I
• Prerequisite: Current AHA ("C" course) CPR card
• Corequisite: DEH 1800
Students begin patient care in dental hygiene clinic with emphasis on
patient assessment for completion of the dental hygiene diagnosis,
care planning, and treatment. Time allotted for clinical seminar.
(Special Fee: $575.00)
DEH 1802 2 2 0
DENTAL HYGIENE II
• Prerequisites: DEH 1800, DEH 1800L, DEH 1602 and
HUN 2202
• Corequisite: DEH 1802L
Topics include dietary analysis, modifications in the dental hygiene
process of care for identified special needs patients, domestic
violence, and child abuse.
DEH 1802L 3 0 9
CLINICAL DENTAL HYGIENE II
• Prerequisite: DES 1600
• Corequisite: DEH 1802
Emphasizes increasing skill in patient care, instrumentation, and
radiographs. Students perform additional clinical services such as pit
and fissure sealants and alginate impressions. Selected off-campus
clinical sites enhance clinical experience with special patients. Time
allotted for clinical seminar. (Special Fee: $55.00)
DEH 2300 2 2 0
PHARMACOLOGY
Presentation of the physical and chemical properties, dosage, methods
of administration and therapeutic usage of pharmaceutical
preparation used in dentistry.
DEH 2400 3 3 0
GENERAL AND ORAL PATHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: DEH 1130C
Introduction to general pathology with consideration of common
diseases affecting the human body; the oral systemic connection.
Emphasis placed on the study of pathological conditions associated
with the oral cavity.
DEH 2604 1 1 0
PERIODONTOLOGY II
• Prerequisite: DEH 1602
A continuation of Periodontology I with emphasis on surgical and nonsurgical
therapies and related periodontal treatment
DEH 2605 1 2 0
PERIODONTOLOGY SEMINAR
• Prerequisite: DEH 2604
Application of theory to selected case studies and exposure to new
treatment modalities for periodontal disease. Review of current
research on the relationship between systemic diseases and
periodontal disease.
DEH 2701 3 3 0
COMMUNITY DENTAL HEALTH I
• Prerequisite: SPC 1608
Introduces students to the study of various aspects of community
dentistry/public health, including basic concepts of analysis, planning,
implementation, and evaluation in public health. Statistical analysis,
research methodology, and dental health presentations to groups are
also covered.
DEH 2702 1 1 0
COMMUNITY DENTAL HEALTH II
• Prerequisite: DEH 2701
Gives student dental hygienists an opportunity to apply concepts and
methods learned in DEH 2701 to a community project which students
design and implement.
DEH 2804 2 2 0
DENTAL HYGIENE III
• Prerequisites: DEH 1802, DEH 1802L, DEH 2604 and DEH 2300
• Corequisite: DEH 2804L
Includes study of case documentation and intraoral photography.
Continue study of treatment considerations for medically
compromised patients. Time allotted for case studies and
clinical seminars.
DEH 2804L 4 0 12
CLINICAL DENTAL HYGIENE III
• Prerequisites: DEH 1802 , DEH 1802L and DEH 2604
• Corequisite: DEH 2804
Emphasizes increasing proficiency in oral prophylaxis, radiographic
techniques, and patient care plans. Continued development of skills in
root debridement, dietary analysis, diagnostic models, and use of
chemotherapeutics. Students prepare case documentation on a
selected clinical patient and participate in patient care at off-campus
clinical sites. Time allotted for clinical seminar. (Special Fee: $105.00)
DEH 2806L 5 0 15
CLINICAL DENTAL HYGIENE IV
• Prerequisites: DEH 2804 and DEH 2804L
• Corequisite: DEH 2812
Emphasizes the development of time management skills and the
incorporation of dental hygiene treatment modalities to entry-level
competence for the profession. Introduces nitrous oxide conscious
sedation. Students continue to participate in patient care at offcampus
clinical sites. Time allotted for clinical seminar.
(Special Fee: $110.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
257
Dental Hygiene Dental Hygiene
DEH 2812 2 2 0
DENTAL HYGIENE IV
• Prerequisites: DEH 2804, DEH 2804L, and DEH 2400
• Corequisite: DEH 2806L
Includes study of ethics, jurisprudence and practice management,
résumé writing and employment opportunities.
DEH 2930 1 - 5 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN DENTAL HYGIENE
• Prerequisite: Department approval
For students interested in obtaining additional dental hygiene skills.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 10 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
DES 1020 2 2 0
DENTAL ANATOMY
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Dental Hygiene A.S. Degree
program
• Corequisite: DES 1020L
Study of skeletal, muscular, circulatory, nervous and glandular systems
of head and neck. Emphasizes tooth morphology and function.
DES 1020L 1 0 3
DENTAL ANATOMY LAB
• Corequisite: DES 1020
Includes identification of permanent and primary dentition, the study
of skeletal portions of the human skull, blood and nerve supply, and
muscles and glands associated with the head, neck and oral cavity.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
DES 1051 2 2 0
DENTAL PAIN CONTROL AND LOCAL ANESTHESIA
• Prerequisites: DES 1020 and DES 1020L
This course covers pain control in dentistry, including topical and local
anesthetics, nitrous oxide sedation, and the use of analgesics.
DES 1100 2 2 0
DENTAL MATERIALS
• Prerequisites: DES 1020 and DES 1020L
• Corequisite: DES 1100L
Includes study of characteristics, properties, and application of
materials used in dentistry.
DES 1100L 1 0 3
DENTAL MATERIALS LAB
• Corequisite: DES 1100
Includes properties, manipulation and application of dental materials.
Students practice manipulating and using materials commonly used in
dental and dental hygiene practice. (Special Fee: $30.00)
DES 1200 2 2 0
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: DES 1020 and DES 1020L
• Corequisite: DES 1200L
Provides student with background on nature, physical behavior and
biological effect of radiation as well as radiation hygiene.
DES 1200L 1 0 3
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY LABORATORY
• Corequisite: DES 1200
Develops student proficiency in exposing and processing
diagnostically acceptable radiographs. Lab sessions provide
experience in x-ray safety procedures, exposure, processing, mounting
and interpreting radiographs. (Special Fee: $50.00)
DES 1600 1 1 0
DENTAL OFFICE EMERGENCIES
• Prerequisites: DES 1800 and DES 1800L
Basic skills necessary to function effectively as a dental team member
in medical emergencies in the dental office. Emphasis on prevention
and management of emergency situations. (CPR certification not
included in course.)
DES 1800 1 1 0
INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL PROCEDURES
• Corequisites: DES 1800L, DEH 1003, and DEH 1003L
Course topics include infection control procedures to prevent disease
transmission and patient assessment skills.
DES 1800L 1 0 3
INTRODUCTION TO CLINICAL PROCEDURES LAB
• Corequisites: DES 1800, DEH 1003, and DEH 1003L
Clinical application of information covered in DES 1800. Students
perform clinical assessment procedures on student partners to
develop clinical skills and perform acceptable infection control
processes in the dental hygiene clinic. (Special Fee: $30.00)
Digital Media Technology
DIG 1102C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO CLIENT-SIDE PROGRAMMING
Covers basic programming knowledge applied to front-end web
technology with a focus on the JavaScript programming language.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 1108C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO SERVER-SIDE PROGRAMMING
Covers basic programming knowledge applied to back-end web
technology with a focus on the PHP programming language.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 1631C 3 2 1
DIGITAL INDUSTRY PRACTICES
The business practices of digital media industries are examined with
special emphasis on project management, legal issues, teamwork,
contracts, communication, and revenue. (Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 1940 1 1 0
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR DIGITAL MEDIA
The student will perform self-reflective exercises to determine working
and learning styles, research industry positions, learn basic job hunting
skills, attend meetings of professional organizations, and learn how to
develop and present their work.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Dental Hygiene Digital Media Technology
258
DIG 2000C (Formerly GRA 1580) 5 5 2
INTRODUCTION TO DIGITAL MEDIA AND DESIGN
An introduction to computers and application programs currently
used in the industry for visual communication projects. Students will
apply principles of design and typography to plan, produce, and
present individual and group projects typical of those used in the
graphics and digital media industry. (Special Fee $62.00)
DIG 2030C 3 3 1
DIGITAL VIDEO AND SOUND
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2000C or GRA 1142C;
or department approval
Introduction to the concepts, principles, tools, and techniques of
producing, assembling, and mixing digital video and audio.
Understand story, creativity, planning, and organizational skills as a
part of the production process. (Special Fee: $94.00)
DIG 2092C 3 2 1
ETHICS OF WEB DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in DIG 1631C; or department
approval
Students will explore community contribution, open source etiquette,
attribution and the ethical questions surrounding social media and
work for hire. (Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 2100C 2 2 1
WEB ESSENTIALS
Students become familiar with essential concepts used to employ
critical thinking and basic programming skills to create standards
compliant web sites. Students also learn the importance of usability,
accessibility, and web standards when creating projects.
(Special Fee: $7.00)
DIG 2101C 3 2 1
ADVANCED WEB ESSENTIALS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grades of C in DIG 2100C and either
DIG 2000C or GRA 1142C; or department approval
Students will learn about cross-browser compatibility, the terminology
of internet systems, and advanced CSS techniques.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 2106C 3 3 1
ADVANCED CLIENT-SIDE PROGRAMMING
• Prequisite: Minimum grades of C in DIG 1102C and DIG 2100C;
or minimum grades of C in COP 1000 and COP 2822; or
department approval
Covers event-driven programming, manipulating the Document Object
Model, client-side event handling, and HTML forms with an industrystandard
JavaScript framework. (Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 2107C 3 3 1
ADVANCED SERVER-SIDE PROGRAMMING
• Prequisites: Minimum grades of C in DIG 1108C, DIG 2100C and
DIG 1940; or minimum grades of C in COP 1000 and COP 2822;
or department approval
Covers the interaction of client requests over the internet, web
services (PHP, HTML, HTTP) Business Objects and Business Logic
Software design patterns, and generating responses over a server.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 2109C 3 2 2
DIGITAL IMAGING FUNDAMENTALS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2000c and a
minimum grade of C in ART 1300C or TPA 1380 or department
approval
Introduction to the concepts and principles of digital imaging and the
tools and techniques of image capture, creation, manipulation, and
integration of still images. Understand composition, layout, color
theory, image capture, and output using industry-standard software.
(Special Fee: $59.00)
DIG 2170C 3 2 1
WEB APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in DIG 2106C and DIG 2107C
and DIG 2561C and COP 2341; or department approval
Given a set of requirements, students will build a complete
application, from modeling the data to the final display of the page.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 2282C 3 1 4
VISUAL MEDIA FOR AUDIO PROFESSIONALS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in MUM 2600C and
MUM 2634L or departmental approval
Students will learn basic concepts of video production, video editing,
graphics creation, project authoring, and distribution of media for
audio professionals. (Special Fee: $46.00)
DIG 2284C 3 1 4
ADVANCED DIGITAL VIDEO AND SOUND
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in DIG 2030C and
DIG 2430C; or department approval
Develops creative and organizational skills needed for advanced
digital video production. Requires participation in a group video
production. (Special Fee: $127.00)
DIG 2291C 3 3 1
ADVANCED AUDIO VISUAL TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in TPA 2257 and either
DIG 2284C or TPA 2290C; or department approval
An in-depth exploration of the audiovisual technology and practices of
the entertainment industry, the course will focus on the development
of proficiency in the operation of a variety of audiovisual equipment
with emphasis on systems integration. (Special Fee: $94.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Digital Media Technology Digital Media Technology
259
DIG 2292C 3 3 1
DIGITAL POST-PRODUCTION
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2030C or departmental
approval
A detailed exploration into editing theory and post-production tasks.
Includes instruction in color correction and authoring interactive
designs for motion picture distribution. (Special Fee: $50.00)
DIG 2302C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO 3D MOTION GRAPHICS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in GRA 2156C and either DIG
2341C or GRA 2160; or department approval
Students will learn fundamental concepts for the creation of threedimensional
motion graphics. (Special Fee: $63.00)
DIG 2312C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO ACTIONSCRIPT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in DIG 1102C and DIG 1940;
or department approval
Reinforces basic programming concepts inside the Adobe Flash
environment. Students will learn the basics of the Flash interface along
with beginning to intermediate level coding inside ActionScript.
(Special Fee: $53.00)
DIG 2317C 3 3 1
ADVANCED ACTIONSCRIPT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in DIG 1108C and DIG 2312C;
or department approval
Using industry-standard authoring software and scripting languages,
students author, optimize, and debug an advanced, interactive
presentation through various stages of development. Special attention
is given to creating interactive projects and interfaces.
(Special Fee: $53.00)
DIG 2341C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO MOTION GRAPHICS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in ART 1300C and
DIG 2000C or department approval
• Prerequisite or Corequisite: GRA 1413
Students will learn basic concepts of motion graphics creation for
various distribution formats. (Special Fee: $70.00)
DIG 2342C 3 3 1
ADVANCED MOTION GRAPHICS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in GRA 1206C and either
DIG 2341C or GRA 2160C; or department approval
Advanced motion graphics concepts and techniques will be taught,
enabling students to produce sophisticated motion graphics projects.
Students will explore programming and input devices used to create
more complex motion graphics. (Special Fee: $70.00)
DIG 2430C 3 2 1
DIGITAL STORYTELLING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ART 1300C or DIG 1940 or
TPA 1380; or department approval
The course focuses on the use of narrative forms in interactive media
and other new technologies. Students will explore and create nonlinear
and interactive story structures. (Special Fee $43.00)
DIG 2431C 3 2 1
ADVANCED DIGITAL STORYTELLING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2430C; or department
approval
Students create purpose-driven narratives utilizing industry-standard
software. (Special Fee: $70.00)
DIG 2500C 3 3 1
FUNDAMENTALS OF INTERACTIVE DESIGN
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in GRA 1206C and DIG 2202C
or DIG 2109C or GRA 2201C or GRA 2156C or department
approval
Implement the foundations of interactive media including userinterface
design concepts, optimization/performance issues, resources
and tools. Students combine audio, video, imaging, animation, and
other media formats to construct an interactive product using
industry-standard software. (Special Fee $53.00)
DIG 2561C 3 2 1
PROJECT MANAGEMENT FOR DIGITAL MEDIA
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2106C or DIG 2107C; or
department approval
This course covers planning and managing the creative and technical
requirements of a web or multimedia project. Topics include project
scheduling, budgeting, tracking, and reporting. (Special Fee: $36.00)
DIG 2580C (Formerly GRA 2587) 1 1 1
DIGITAL MEDIA PORTFOLIO REVIEW
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2284C or DIG 2342C
or DIG 2561C; or department approval
Creation by the student of a final digital portfolio summarizing the
student’s body of work. The student will design and complete a
résumé, self-promotional piece, and undergo a formal interview with
industry professionals. Students will be expected to earn a C or higher
on a comprehensive exam using industry-standard software and
procedures. (Special Fee $73.00)
DIG 2822C 3 2 1
ELECTRONIC JOURNALISM
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in DIG 1940 and DIG 2030C;
or department approval
Students will learn the fundamentals of electronic news gathering.
Topics to be covered include shooting and editing a news package, as
well as writing and producing techniques. (Special Fee: $118.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Digital Media Technology Drafting and Design Technology
260
DIG 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN DIGITAL MEDIA TECHNOLOGY
For students who are interested in advanced topics in digital media
technology. May include lab and/or field work as part of the class,
depending on topic. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
DIG 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN DIGITAL MEDIA
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, math, English, and English for Academic Purposes;
2.0 institutional or overall GPA; 12 credits, including a minimum
grade of C in DIG 2000C; or Program Chair approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their educational plans. Each
earned credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of
work. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 4 hours, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Internship Fee: $10.00)
DIG 2943 (Formerly GRA 2943) 1 - 3 variable
INTERNSHIP IN DIGITAL MEDIA
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses in
reading, math, English, and English for Academic Purposes; a min.
2.0 institutional or overall GPA; and 12 credits, including a
minimum grade of C in DIG 2284C or DIG 2342C or DIG 2561C. The
Program Director/Program Chair/ Program Coordinator or
Internship Workforce Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
DIG 2950C 3 2 2
DIGITAL MEDIA PROJECT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2284C or DIG 2342C or
DIG 2561C; or department approval
Students will participate in selected projects for clients internal and
external to the college, creating video and motion graphic content.
(Special Fee: $88.00)
Drafting and Design Technology
ETD 1031C 2 1 1
INTRODUCTION TO CONSTRUCTION/DRAFTING
TECHNOLOGY
Overview of experience, academic and technical requirements in
construction/architecture, drafting, civil technology and surveying.
Introduction to computers and application software. This course
includes learning activity designed to ensure competence in both oral
communication and the basic use of computers.
ETD 1100C 3 2 2
ENGINEERING DRAWING
Survey of principles and practices involved in making and reading
engineering drawings. Emphasis placed on lettering, industrial
symbolism, visualization, orthographic projection and line techniques.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
ETD 1320 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO CADD
Engineering drawing recommended. Introduction to computer-aided
drafting/design. Emphasizes skills and competencies necessary to
function in systems drafting environment. Includes keyboard
commands, menu printer/plotter, input devices, computer terminology
and systems operation. Provides hands-on experience to create, save
and retrieve drawings having various shapes, lines, types, dimensions
and layers. This course includes learning activity designed to ensure
competence in the basic use of computers. (Special Fee: $32.00)
ETD 1328C 4 4 0
INTRODUCTION TO MICROSTATION
Previous engineering drawing experience recommended. Introduction
to computer aided drafting/design. Emphasizes skills and
competencies needed to function in systems drafting environment.
Includes keyboard commands, menu printer/plotter, input devices,
computer terminology and systems operation. Provides hands-on
experience to create, save and retrieve drawings having various
shapes, lines, types, dimensions and levels. MicroStation software will
be used in this course. (Special Fee: $28.00)
ETD 1340 (Formerly ETD 1350) 3 2 2
ADVANCED CADD
• Prerequisite: ETD 1320 or department approval
Provides experienced CADD student opportunity to approach detailed
and intricate drafting and design problems from computer
perspective. Provides hands-on experience in creating custom menus,
slides, text fonts, attributes, extractions, 3-D drawings and rotations.
(Special Fee: $28.00)
ETD 1701 3 2 2
MECHANICAL DRAFTING I
• Prerequisite: ETD 1320
Drawing basic machine elements and subassemblies including screw
threads, linkage, gears and cams with consideration to precision and
limit dimensioning, tolerance allowances and limits. Study of working
assembly and outline drawings with attention to drawing of assembly
and details from pictorial drawings and sectional views of assemblies.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
ETD 2332 (Formerly CAP 2203) 3 2 2
CUSTOMIZING AND DIRECTORIES - CADD
• Prerequisites: ETD 1320 and ETD 1350
Provides hands-on experience in writing of macros and development
of menus, followed by instruction in enhancing autocad system
environment. Presents autolisp programming to develop more efficient
macros and add drafting and calculation functions to commands.
(Special Fee: $32.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Digital Media Technology Drafting and Design Technology
261
ETD 2355C (Formerly CAP 2201) 3 2 2
3-D CADD
Engineering drawing and computer-aided drafting recommended. This
course provides the CADD student with the opportunity to approach
mechanical drafting and design problems from a 3-D solid modeling
perspective. The student will learn how to create parametric 3-D solid
models with computer software and how to take advantage of the
information contained within to improve the design process.
(Special Fee: $36.00)
ETD 2614 4 4 0
ELECTROMECHANICAL DRAFTING
• Prerequisite: ETD 1100C
• Recommended prerequisite: ETD 1320
Study in fundamentals of electromechanical drafting designed to
provide student with basic concepts and principles needed to prepare
electromechanical working drawings. Student introduced in laboratory
to various circuit elements and devices used in preparation of writing
diagrams, schematics, block diagrams, layout of electronic chassis and
wire harnesses. Emphasis on printed circuit board layout, as well as
advanced microcircuit and integrated circuit drafting techniques.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
ETD 2731 (formerly ETD 2702) 3 2 2
MECHANICAL DRAFTING II
• Prerequisite: ETD 1701
This is a continuation of ETD 1701 with emphasis placed on precision,
accurate drawings, proper dimensioning schemes and design
processes. It will also focus on the basic application and use of
Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing (GD&T) techniques as
applied by the latest ASME standard. This is a hands-on interactive
learning course using CAD software to design and draft various
components of an assembly. (Special Fee: $28.00)
ETD 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN DRAFTING AND DESIGN TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Provides exposure to various technical and non-technical disciplines
in which student is likely to become involved upon entry into drafting
and design environment. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
ETD 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN DRAFTING AND DESIGN
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including EGN 1111C. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
ETD 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN DRAFTING AND DESIGN TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ETD 1320 and ETD 1350. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program
/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
MTB 2321 4 4 0
TECHNICAL MATHEMATICS
Fundamental arithmetic, geometry, and algebraic operations including
algebraic expressions, exponents, factoring and linear and curvilinear
equations, graphs of functions and equations, various coordinate
systems, solution of right triangles and oblique triangles by means of
trigonometric functions; word problems and engineering/surveying/
construction applications. Use of scientific calculator.
Economics
ECO 1000 3 3 0
BASIC ECONOMICS
General survey of basic economic concepts and institutions to
prepare student for intelligent citizenship. Emphasis on principles of
production, determination of prices, distribution of income and
economic problems of everyday life. Not intended for majors in
economics or certain business curricula requiring 6 semester credits in
ECO 2013 and ECO 2023. No credit granted for ECO 1000 if ECO 2013
and/or ECO 2023 have been satisfactorily completed.
ECO 2013 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS-MACRO
Emphasis on study of macroeconomics: national income accounting,
consumption, saving and investment, government spending in
economic activity, influence of government money and banking,
problems of inflation and unemployment, international trade and its
impact on domestic economic activity. For prospective economics
majors and students with interests in specialized business curricula,
completion of full Principles of Economics sequence (ECO 2013 and
ECO 2023) is highly recommended.
ECO 2013H 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS-MACRO - HONORS
Same as ECO 2013. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Drafting and Design Technology Economics
262
ECO 2023 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS-MICRO
Introduction to economic theory and fundamentals of economic
analysis. Emphasis on study of microeconomics: market structure,
price determination, factors of production, distribution of income and
effects of monopoly and oligopoly on markets. For prospective
economics majors and students with interests in specialized business
curricula, completion of full Principles of Economics sequence (ECO
2013 and ECO 2023) is highly recommended.
ECO 2023H 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF ECONOMICS-MICRO - HONORS
Same as ECO 2023. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
ECO 2930 (Formerly ECO 2932) 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ECONOMICS
For students interested in special topics that further explore the
field of economics through research, discussion and observation.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for maximum of 6 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
ECO 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN ECONOMICS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses in
reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic Purposes.
A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12 credits,
including ECO 2013 or ECO 2023. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of
required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Education
ARE 2000 (Formerly ARE 2002) 3 3 0
ART AND CREATIVITY
Prepares teachers/instructional personnel to integrate art and
creativity into the early childhood curriculum with an emphasis on
child development, the nature of children's art, creativity, artistic
elements, sensory stimulation and aesthetics forms.
EDF 2005 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO THE TEACHING PROFESSION
This is a survey course including historical, sociological, and
philosophical foundations of education, governance and finance of
education, educational policies, legal, moral, and ethical issues and the
professionalism of teaching. Students will be provided information on
the Florida Educator Accomplished Practices, Sunshine State
Standards, and the Professional Educator Competencies. Students are
required to complete a minimum of 15 hours of field-based experience
with children and youth in schools or similar settings and not via
virtual modes of film or Internet
EDF 2085 (Formerly EDG 2701) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO DIVERSITY FOR EDUCATORS
• Prerequisite: EDF 2005 or department approval
Designed for the prospective educator, this course provides the
opportunity to explore issues of diversity, including an understanding
of the influence of exceptionalities, culture, family, gender, sexual
orientation, socioeconomic status, religion, languages of origin,
ethnicity, and age upon the educational experience. Students will
explore personal attitudes toward diversity and exceptionalities.
Students will be provided information on the Florida Educator
Accomplished Practices, Sunshine State Standards, and Professional
Educator Competencies. A minimum of 15 hours of field-based
experience working with diverse populations of children and youth in
schools or similar settings is required. The field experience should not
be via virtual modes of film or Internet.
EDF 2720 3 3 0
CHILDREN IN SCHOOLS: LEGAL, ETHICAL AND SAFETY CONCERNS
This course explores the role of education in children’s lives through
the analysis of legal, ethical and safety concerns.
EDG 2935 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN EDUCATION
• Prerequisite: EDF 2005 or department approval
For students interested in special topics that explore further field of
education through research, discussion and observation. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided
different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot
be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Economics Education
263
EDG 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN EDUCATION
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including EDF 2005 or EME 2040. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
• Pre or corequisite: EDG 2701 or department approval.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides
students with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
EEC 2001 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATION
An overview of early childhood development and related programs
and services. Presentation will focus on historical roots, societal
changes, program differentiation, and future trends. Course content
and activities are designed for consistency with eligibility criteria and
certification requirements of state agencies and professional
associations.
EEX 2010 3 3 0
ORIENTATION TO EXCEPTIONAL EDUCATION
This course provides an overview of exceptional education including
basic philosophy, legal issues, history and development of this
discipline. Characteristics of exceptional learners and current trends
in education, classroom practices and psychological, sociological and
medical aspects of disabilities and giftedness are also covered.
EME 2040 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO TECHNOLOGY FOR EDUCATORS
Application of instructional design principles for the use of technology
to enhance the quality of teaching and learning in the classroom. The
course includes hands-on experience with educational media,
emerging technologies, and hardware, software, and the peripherals
for the personal computer as well as data-driven decision making
processes. Identification of appropriate software for classroom
applications, classroom procedures for integrating technologies with
emphasis on legal and ethical use, and effective instructional strategies
for teachers and students in regard to research, analysis, and
demonstration of technology. Students will be provided on overview of
the Florida Educator Accomplished Practices, Sunshine State
Standards, the Professional Educator Competencies, and the National
Education Technology Standards.
Educator Preparation Institute
To register for any of the Educator Preparation Institute courses, you
must apply and be admitted to the Educator Preparation Institute
program. Courses offered through the Educator Preparation Institute
provide institutional credit, are not transferable to an upper-division
institution, and do not count toward any degree.
EPI 0001 3 3 0
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
This course focuses on how to maintain a classroom. Topics include:
record keeping, classroom management, school safety, integrating
Sunshine State standards into curriculum, development of lesson
plans, parent conference management, assessment techniques,
implications of the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)
and other standardized tests, professional ethics and school law.
EPI 0002 3 3 0
INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
This course focuses on proficiency in the application of a variety of
instructional strategies. These include multimodal instruction, learning
styles knowledge, cooperative and collaborative learning,
accommodations for exceptional students, and the infusion of
technology into lesson plans.
EPI 0003 3 3 0
TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
This course focuses on teaching the participant to employ technology
as an integral part of the teaching and learning process. Instruction
is provided in commonly-used software suites and on the Internet.
Technology and Internet integration into the classroom is emphasized.
EPI 0004 3 3 0
TEACHING AND LEARNING PROCESS
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
This course focuses on instructing the participant in various learning
theories as applied in the instructional process. Topics will include
learning theories, motivation and persistence, intelligence,
exceptionalities, standardized testing, critical thinking, multiple
intelligences, and second language acquisition.
EPI 0010 3 3 0
FOUNDATIONS OF RESEARCH-BASED PRACTICES IN READING
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
This course focuses on instructing the participant on proper language
structure, function and cognition of phonemic awareness, phonics,
fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension. This instruction is grounded
in scientifically-based research.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Education Educator Preparation Institute
264
EPI 0020 2 2 0
PROFESSIONAL FOUNDATIONS
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
• Corequisite: EPI 0940
This course instructs the participant on the necessary foundation for
becoming a productive member of the teaching profession. Topics
include history and philosophy of education, school governance,
school finance, school law, ethics, purpose of schools, and continuing
professional development.
EPI 0030 2 2 0
DIVERSITY
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
• Corequisite: EPI 0945
This course instructs the participant on the necessary understanding
of the variety of backgrounds and cultures that may be found in a
typical classroom and how social class, religion, language, gender
differences, culture, ethnicity, physical differences, and prejudices
affect how students learn.
EPI 0940 1 1 0
TEACHING PROFESSION FIELD EXPERIENCE
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
• Corequisite: EPI 0020
This course consists of a 15-hour field experience in a public, charter or
accredited private school.
EPI 0945 1 1 0
DIVERSITY FIELD EXPERIENCE
• Prerequisite: Admission to Educator Preparation Institute
Program
• Corequisite: EPI 0030
This course consists of a 15-hour field experience in a public, charter or
accredited private school.
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical
and Computer Engineering Technology
See Computer Engineering Technology (Networking) for additional
course descriptions.
Courses for the Bachelor of Science in Electrical and Computer
Engineering Technology are also included in this heading.
CET 2112C 3 3 2
DIGITAL SYSTEMS I
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and a minimum grade of C in MTB
1329C or MAC 1105 or department approval
Introductory lecture/laboratory course in computer technology.
Introduces principles and techniques required for development of
analysis skills in digital circuitry. Topics include computer number
systems; digital codes and parity error detection methods; Boolean
algebra; Karnaugh mapping; logic gate minimization techniques;
arithmetic operations via combination logic gate minimization
techniques; arithmetic operations via combination logic; flip-flop
timing and synchronization circuits; and pulse waveform generation.
Laboratory projects provide hands-on experience in use of laboratory
instruments and in techniques for measurement and interpretation of
digital data. (Special Fee: $56.00)
CET 2113C 3 3 2
DIGITAL SYSTEMS II
• Prerequisite: CET 2112C or department approval
Intermediate lecture/laboratory course in computer technology.
Introduces various digital subsystems (logic assemblies) and their use
in digital computing and control systems and provides analytical tools
necessary to perform analyses and problem diagnoses. Topics include
counter/shift register systems and applications; digital subsystems
using integrated circuit logic chips encoding/decoding techniques;
data interfacing and busing; multiplex/demultiplex systems;
analog/digital conversion techniques; static/dynamic memory systems;
and computer system organization. Laboratory projects and
demonstrations provide practical insight into capabilities and
limitations of alternative methods of data transfer, storage and
interface conversion commonly utilized in digital computing or control
system applications. (Special Fee: $59.00)
CET 2123C 3 2 1
FUNDAMENTALS OF MICROPROCESSORS
• Prerequisite: CET 2112C
Introduction to basic principles of microprocessor architecture and
assembly language programming. Content divided into two sections:
microprocessor architecture and programming. Designed around
8085/8080A microprocessor architecture, bus architecture, memory
(R/W Memory, ROM, and EPROM), and memory map. Programming
includes such topics as introduction to 8085/8080A instruction set,
loops, indexing, time delays, and subroutines. (Special Fee: $58.00)
CET 3136C 4 2 2
LOGIC DEVICES PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisite: CET 2113C
An in-depth study of hardware and software architecture of
programmable logic devices. Topics include PLDs architecture and
design of Altera hardware and software description language, HDL
format and syntax, and representation of data in AHDL and VHDL logic
circuits. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical
and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
(Special Fee: $67.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Educator Preparation Institute Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
265
CET 3464 (FormerlyCET 3383) 3 3 0
SOFTWARE APPLICATIONS IN ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: A minimum of grade of C in MAC 1105
Student is introduced to the latest computer software applications
including virtual circuit creation and analysis (PSpice), computer
aided drafting (AutoCAD), procedural programming (MATLAB), and
graphical programming (LabVIEW) to solve a variety of engineering
related problems. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee: $65.00)
CET 4126C 4 3 1
MICROPROCESSOR PROGRAMMING
• Prerequisites: CET 2113C, CET 2123C and COP 3275
This course is designed to introduce the student to the hardware
architecture and software architecture programming of the
microprocessors. Main topics include microcomputer assembly
programming, operating system environment, and the hardware
characteristics of the microprocessor. Minimum grade of C is required
if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee: $32.00)
CET 4333 3 3 0
COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE
• Prerequisite: CET 2113C and CET 2123C
A study of the computer architecture. Major topics include instruction
sets, modeling and analysis of computer systems, hardware and
software interface, memory management, and system performance.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
CET 4367C 4 2 2
MICROCONTROLLER DEVICES
• Prerequisites: CET 2113C and CET 2123C
A course emphasizing the design and programming of
microcontrollers. Student will be introduced to microcontroller
architecture, use of programmable counter/timer arrays, analog
interfaces, serial communications and other peripherals. Minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer
Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
(Special Fee: $49.00)
CET 4382 3 3 0
DATA COMMUNICATION AND NETWORKING
• Prerequisite: EET 2325C and EGN 3428
An in-depth study of different layers in a computer network and
processes related to each one of them. Topics includes Physical, Data
link, Network, Transport and Application layers and their roles in
communication of data in networking. Design and performance of a
network will be analyzed through mathematical techniques. Minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer
Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
CET 4663 3 3 0
COMPUTER AND NETWORK SECURITY
• Prerequisite: CET 4382
This course introduces fundamental concepts and techniques of
computer security. Topics include; secure communications, secure
operating systems, and network protection technologies such as
firewall, intrusion detection systems, and access control policies.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
COP 3275 3 3 0
C/C++PROGRAMMING FOR ENGINEERS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2312
A comprehensive course in computer programming using the C and
C++ programming languages. Structured programming in C, especially
for solving numerical problems is covered in detail, and objectoriented
programming in C++ is introduced. Computer programming is
used to improve quantitative problem solving skills by developing
algorithms that apply mathematical techniques. (Special Fee: $34.00)
EET 1015C 3 3 2
FUNDAMENTALS OF DC CIRCUITS
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and MTB 1329C or department approval
Fundamental course in DC electric circuits. Prepares student for EET
1025C and subsequent advanced courses. Classroom lectures
supplemented with laboratory projects to provide student with handson
experience in use of electronics test equipment and in proper
techniques for data measurements/interpretation, trouble-shooting
and orderly documentation of test results and conclusions.
(Special Fee: $64.00)
EET 1025C 3 2 2
FUNDAMENTALS OF AC CIRCUITS
• Prerequisite: EET 1015C
Fundamental course in AC and transient-response networks designed
to prepare students for advanced courses. Classroom lectures
supplemented with laboratory projects to provide student with
practical hands-on experience in use of electronics test equipment and
in proper techniques for data measurements/interpretation, troubleshooting
and orderly documentation of test results and conclusions.
(Special Fee: $64.00)
EET 1036C 5 3 2
FUNDAMENTALS OF DC AND AC CIRCUITS
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and MTB 1329C or MAC 1105 or
department approval
Fundamental course in DC and AC circuits designed to prepare
students for advanced courses in electrical and electronics circuits. A
study of electrical laws, theorems, components, and networks used in
DC and AC circuit applications. (Special Fee: $42.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
266
EET 1141C 3 2 3
SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES AND CIRCUITS
• Prerequisite: EET 1025C or EET 1036C
First of two-course sequence in electronic semiconductor circuits.
Provides basic understanding of electronic circuits which utilize
semiconductor diode and transistor circuit elements. Introduces
concept of circuit simplification via idealizations, approximations and
overview of semiconductor devices and their electrical properties.
Emphasis on circuit analysis and various small-signal, linear and power
applications utilizing diodes and transistors. Students assigned
appropriate hands-on laboratory projects to expose them to practical
considerations in implementing various semiconductor circuits
analyzed in classroom. (Special Fee: $61.00)
EET 1214C 3 1 2
INTRODUCTION TO ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY
A course involving laboratory environment learning. Student will learn
to identify electronic components, use computer circuit simulators,
solder and desolder components, and use the basic lab instruments for
testing and troubleshooting. Student will be required to build a kit and
demonstrate functionality and workmanship. (Special Fee: $60.00)
EET 2142C 3 2 3
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
• Prerequisite: EET 1141C or department approval
Second of two-course sequence in electronic semiconductor circuits.
Covers more complex applications, including field-effect transistor
circuitry, amplitude/phase shift response of transistor amplifiers,
integrated circuits, negative and positive feedback circuits, voltage
regulators, operational amplifiers, spectrum analysis and harmonic
distortion. Provides hands-on experience via assigned laboratory
projects to supplement classroom lectures. Familiarity gained with
array of commercial test equipment frequently used in industrial
development and testing facilities. (Special Fee: $58.00)
EET 2325C 3 3 2
RF COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisite: EET 1141C or department approval
An introductory course that enables students to gain a technical
working knowledge of electronic communication. It includes a broad
range of topics such as AM and FM transmission and reception,
transmission lines, Smith Chart, Active and Passive Filters, LC filters,
SAW filters, Crystal filters, Oscillators, RF detectors, and Mixers.
Classroom lectures are supplemented with laboratory projects to
provide hands-on experience in the installation and theory of
operation of the RF systems. (Special Fee: $59.00)
EET 2330 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO TRANSMISSION LINES
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and a minimum grade of C in MTB
1329C or department approval
This a laboratory-oriented course designed to familiarize the students
with the fundamentals of transmission lines. The student is expected
to become familiar with the important ideas and concepts of Fiber
Optics, Coaxial Cables, and Ethernet cables to gain an understanding
of the range of their current applications on an introductory level.
(Special Fee: $35.00)
EET 2365C 3 3 2
WIRELESS AND DATA COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisites: CET 2113C and EET 1141C or department approval
Covers electronic data communication including digital, fiber optics,
and laser communication. Also includes coding transmission RS-232,
RS-422, and IEEE-488 along with introduction to local area networks.
(Special Fee: $49.00)
EET 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING
TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in electronics engineering based on the needs and
areas of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
EET 2941 3 0 0
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION FOR ELECTRONIC ENGINEERING
• Prerequisites: CET 2113C and EET 1025C and Internship Office
approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experience to assist in confirming their educational plans through
classroom instruction, combined with a designated number of
internship contact hours as established by program director.
(Internship Fee: $10.00)
EET 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including CET 2178C, CET 2486C, EET 1141C, and EET
1214C. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator
or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide
override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
EET 3048 3 3 0
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS
• Prerequisites: PHY 2049C and EGN 3428
This course introduces the concepts of steady and dynamic
electromagnetic fields that are important in the design and analysis of
electrical and communication systems, wireless applications, highfrequency
radiation sources and microwave devices. A minimum grade
of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
267
EET 3086C 3 2 2
CIRCUIT ANALYSIS
• Prerequisites: EGN 3428, and EET 1025C or EET 1036C
An advanced course using differential and integral calculus and
transform methods to analyze steady-state and transient responses of
electrical networks in time and frequency domains. Circuit simulator
and laboratory projects will provide an in-depth understanding and
hands-on experience. A minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee: $21.00)
EET 3329C 3 2 2
COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
• Prerequisites: EET 2325C and EET 3086C
A fundamental course in communication systems theory. Topics
include relationship between time and frequency domain signals,
comparison of different modulators and demodulators designs,
bandwidth consideration, effect of noise and performance analysis of
different communication systems. A minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee: $49.00)
EET 3716 3 3 0
LINEAR SYSTEMS AND SIGNALS
• Prerequisites: CET 3464 and EET 3086C
This fundamental technology course bridges the gap between analog
and digital worlds. Topics include time and frequency domain analysis
of continuous- and discrete-time systems, transformation techniques,
and sampling theory. A minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
EET 3732 3 3 0
LINEAR CONTROL SYSTEMS
• Prerequisites: CET 3464 and EET 3086C
This course introduces the principles of Control Systems with an
emphasis on Linear Control Systems. Topics include characterization,
design, and mathematical techniques required to analyze linear
control systems. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
EET 4158C 4 2 2
LINEAR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
• Prerequisites: EET 1141C and EET 3086C
An in-depth course of Operational Amplifier and its applications.
Topics include study of amplifier concepts, analysis of ideal and linear
operational amplifiers under DC and AC conditions, and discussion of
important applications. Circuit simulator and laboratory projects will
provide an in-depth understanding and hands-on experience. A
minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
(Special Fee: $49)
EET 4190C 3 3 1
DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING
• Prerequisites: CET 3464 and EET 3086C
This advanced signal processing course includes the study of signals
and systems, transformation techniques, digital filter designs, and
practical applications of DSP. Students will use MATLAB and a DSP
microprocessor to get an in-depth understanding and hands-on
experience. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee: $49)
EET 4328 3 3 0
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisites: EET 2325C, EET 3086C and EGN 3443
This course focuses on the analysis of wireless signals, deterioration
due to diffraction and noise, ways to improve signal quality, wireless
signal modulation, multiple access techniques, and an overview of
current wireless standards, wireless networking, and cellular concepts.
A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
EET 4336 3 3 0
ANTENNA AND RADAR SYSTEM DESIGN
• Prerequisite: EET 3329C
This course examines concepts of radar & antenna theories and
systems. Topics include radar range equation, radar cross-section
calculations, random processes and noise, array antennas,
beamsteering, doppler and range processing, FM and CW systems,
pulse compression, SAR, clutter, evaluation of various antennas, and
an in-depth understanding and analysis of antenna and Radar-related
topics through term projects. A minimum grade of C is required if used
to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
EET 4359C 3 2 2
DIGITAL COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisites: EET 2325C, EET 3086C and EGN 3443
An advanced communication course introducing students to digital
modulation and demodulation schemes, quantification of channel
noise, signal coding schemes, multiple-access and spread spectrum
techniques. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee: $49)
EET 4388 3 3 0
LASER SATELLITE AND SPACE COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisite: EET 3329C or ETS 4256C
An introduction and overview of laser satellite communication
principles and technologies for unguided, free-space beam
propagation. Special emphasis is placed on highlighting the
differences, as well as similarities to RF communications and other
laser systems, and design issues and options relevant to future laser
communication systems. A minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
268
EET 4950 3 3 0
SENIOR DESIGN PROJECT
• Prerequisite: Department approval
This course is designed to test the student's ability to develop and
complete a proposed project by utilizing the knowledge and
experience gained from previous courses. For this final project the
student is required to present a working model of the project in a
professional manner. The project requirements include a
comprehensive written report, research and analysis data, and oral
presentations. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
EGN 3428 3 4 0
ENGINEERING MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS
• Prerequisite: MAC 2312
Advanced mathematical concepts and methods needed to solve
engineering and engineering technology problems. Topics include
Complex Variables, First- and Higher-Order differential equations,
Laplace transforms, Fourier series, Fourier Transforms, Z- transforms,
vector calculus and analysis, Linear Algebra, and matrix analysis.
A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
EGN 3443 3 3 0
STATISTICAL THEORY FOR ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: MAC 2312
This course encompasses topics of statistical methods and probability
theory important for engineering technology students. Topics include
organization and description of data, axioms and theorems of
probability, conditional probability, probability distributions, Poisson
processes, probability density functions, moment generating functions,
statistics of populations and samples, estimation, test of hypotheses,
regression analysis as applied to Engineering Technology. A minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer
Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
ETI 3116 3 3 0
QUALITY ASSURANCE AND TESTING METHODS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2312
A broad understanding of the quality assurance and control of
electronic products, covering all aspects of quality assurance for
components used in electronic devices, improve product quality
without increasing product cost. Apply Six Sigma process,
methodologies, and tools to develop robust engineering products,
processes, and services. A minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
ETP 1501 (Formerly EST 1835) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO ALTERNATIVE AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
This course will introduce students to a variety of energy sources such
as nuclear, wind, geothermal, solar, hydro and biodiesel.
ETP 2402C (Formerly EET 2552C) 3 2 1
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in ETP 1501 or department
approval
This course examines the direct conversion of solar energy to electricity.
Students will be introduced to photovoltaic cell physics, different photovoltaic
cell technologies, photovoltaic devices and systems, and photovoltaic
energy storage systems. The hands-on exercises will reflect topics
discussed. (Special Fee: $46.00)
ETP 4240C 4 2 2
POWER ELECTRONICS
• Prerequisite: EET 4158C
An advanced level course accompanied by hands-on experiments
covering the topics of control and conversion of electrical power with
high efficiency. Circuits such as power converters, inverters, rectifiers,
cycloconverters, and other commonly used applications will be
discussed. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee: $67.00)
ETP 4241 3 3 0
POWER SYSTEMS AND ENERGY CONVERSION
• Prerequisites: EET 3086C and PHY 2049C
A study of generation and transmission of electric energy. It introduces
the student to the fundamentals of electrical machine and power
electronics design, system integration, control, energy management as
well as techniques used for protection and economic operation of
power systems. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
ETP 4440 3 3 0
PHOTOVOLTAIC TECHNOLOGIES
• Prerequisites: EGN 3428, and EET 1025C or EET 1036C
Students will use PSpice and LabVIEW to analyze and simulate the
performance of PV systems. Topics covered will be solar cell
technological processes, PV systems engineering, characterization and
testing methods, sizing procedures, economic analysis, and
instrumentation. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement.
ETS 1210C (Formerly EST 1210C) 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO PHOTONICS
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and MTB 1329C or MAC 1105
An introductory course exploring the fundamentals of Photonics
theory, concepts, and applications. Contents include the nature and
properties of light, light sources, human vision, and laser safety; basics
of geometric and physical optics, and basic principles and applications
of Holography. Laboratory experimentations will complement
theoretical concepts of the course. (Special Fee: $57.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
269
ETS 1603 (Formerly EST 1603) 3 3 0
FUNDAMENTALS OF ROBOTICS AND SIMULATION
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and MTB 1329C
An introductory course designed to familiarize students with the basic
principles of robotics and simulation. This course includes basic
robotics concepts, operation, classification, and applications. It
provides a framework for the discussion of artificial intelligence. This
course also includes basic principles of modeling and simulation as
applied in different environments and systems. Students will become
familiar with simulation and robotic systems. (Special Fee: $60.00)
ETS 1610 (Formerly EST 1610) 3 2 2
PRINCIPLES OF VIRTUAL REALITY
• Prerequisite: ETS 1603
An introductory course in Virtual Reality (VR) technology. The student
will be introduced to the physical principles, technological challenges,
possibilities, and limitations for the creation of virtual environments.
Laboratory projects emphasize the visualization, exploration, and
modification of scientific data in virtual environments.
(Special Fee: $54.00)
ETS 2220C (Formerly EST 2220C) 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO FIBER OPTICS
• Prerequisites: EET 1214C and MTB 1329C or MAC 1105
Basic concepts of fiber optics, fiber hardware, and its applications are
introduced. Topics include Light and its properties, Fiber Preparation,
Handling, and Laser Alignment Procedures; Numerical Aperture
measurement techniques, Types of Optical Fibers; Measurement of
Optical Fiber attenuation and related practical problems; Property of
Optical Fibers, Connectors and Splicing methods, Couplers, Power
Budget Calculations, Misalignment Measurements and Techniques,
Fiber Optics Communication System, Fiber Amplifiers, Fiber Lasers,
and Fiber Gratings, Transmitters, Receivers, and splitters.
(Special Fee: $59.00)
ETS 2221C (Formerly EST 2221C) 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRO-OPTICAL DEVICES
• Prerequisites: ETS 1210C and EET 1025C or EET 1036C
An introduction to the principles of opto-electronics design to those
with a background in general electronics design, circuit theory,
electronic devices, and digital techniques. Students will become
familiar with radiometric and photometric theory, basic optics, and
opto-electronic devices and methods. Devices covered are optoelectronic
sources, detectors, lasers, and laser diodes, optocouplers,
and fiber optics devices. This course includes several laboratory
experiences. (Special Fee: $57.00)
ETS 2230C (Formerly EST 2230C) 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO LASERS
• Prerequisites: ETS 1210C and EET 1025C or EET 1036C
This course introduces students to the basic principles of laser
operations, safety, and applications. Topics include: Elements and
Operation of a Laser, Laser Safety, Emission and Absorption of light,
Lasing Action, Optical Cavities and Modes of Oscillation, Temporal and
Spatial Characteristics of Lasers, and Laser Classifications and
Characteristics. Laboratory experimentations will complement and
reinforce the theoretical concepts of lecture material.
(Special Fee: $54.00)
ETS 2275 (Formerly EST 2275) 3 2 2
MODELING AND SIMULATION
• Prerequisite: ETS 1603
This course provides the student with an overview of modeling
methods and the existing simulation types. It includes the application
of different modeling techniques utilizing physical parameters,
mathematics, computational techniques and equations. Emphasis will
be placed on experimental modeling of discrete event and dynamic
systems. Exercises will provide insights of modeling and simulation,
and verification can be achieved by the discussion of observed
behaviors. Principles of object-oriented programming, as applied to
simulation, will be discussed. (Special Fee: $35.00)
ETS 2511C (Formerly EST 2511C) 3 2 2
ELECTROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS
• Prerequisite: EET 1025C or EET 1036C
A study of devices and components that translate electrical energy
into mechanical motion such as servo motors, stepping motors,
solenoids, linear motors and actuators. (Special Fee: $53.00)
ETS 2604 (Formerly EST 2604) 3 2 2
ROBOTICS APPLICATIONS
• Prerequisite: ETS 1603
This course is designed to introduce the student to the basic
principles of robots including classification, operation, maintenance,
troubleshooting, and applications in the robotics industry. Students
will use hands-on practices to become familiar with sections of a
robotic system. (Special Fee: $35.00)
ETS 2673C (Formerly EST 2673C) 3 2 2
PROGRAMMABLE LOGIC CONTROLLERS
• Prerequisite: CET 2112C or department approval
Introduction to theory of operation of analog and digital controllers
and software techniques, including math tables, logic charts, and
Boolean Algebra. Particular emphasis on ladder logic diagrams,
including timing functions, counters, and master control relays.
Laboratory projects provide practical insights into capabilities and
limitations of programmable controllers in industrial applications.
(Special Fee: $35.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
270
ETS 3010 (Formerly EST 3010) 2 2 0
ENGINEERING DOCUMENTATION AND COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in ENC 1101
This course introduces the student to the importance of writing in the
professional engineering career. Topics include guidelines for
professional engineering writing, eliminating intermittent noise in
writing, writing letters, memoranda, online communication, common
engineering documents, reports, interviews résumés, and ethics in
engineering writing. A minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S.
degree requirement.
ETS 3020 (Formerly EST 3020) 2 2 0
ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT AND ETHICS
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in ENC 1101
This course explores the traditional principles of management and
professional ethics related to engineering technology professions.
Major emphasis will be on project planning and design alternatives to
meet cost, performance, and the user along with legal issues,
professional development, and technology transfer as they relate to
graduating engineering technology students. A minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
ETS 4216C (Formerly EST 4216C) 3 2 2
GEOMETRICAL AND WAVE OPTICS
• Prerequisites: ETS 1210 and EGN 3428
Basic principles of geometrical and wave optics. Topics include
refraction and reflection, Gaussian optics, Paraxial optics, simple
optical instruments, electromagnetic fields and waves; Fourier series
and Fourier transforms; interference, interferometers, diffraction,
image formation, and polarized light. A minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technology, B.S. degree requirement. (Special Fee: $49)
ETS 4217C (Formerly EST 4217C) 4 2 2
OPTICAL ENGINEERING & LENS DESIGN
• Prerequisites: ETS 2221C or PHY 2049C and EGN 3428
Fundamentals of optical system layout and design; exact and paraxial
ray tracing. Use of optical design software in lens design, optical
materials, aberrations theory and balancing, image evaluation. A
minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Electrical and
Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
(Special Fee $49)
ETS 4228C (Formerly EST 4228C) 3 2 2
OPTICAL DETECTORS AND SYSTEMS
• Prerequisites: EET 3086C and ETS 4216C
An in-depth study of Optical Detectors and Systems. Topics include:
Photodetector, thermal detectors, figures of merit, responsivity, NEP,
D*, and BLIP conditions, search systems, thermal-imager systems,
optical detector classifications, quantitative detector comparisons,
and Modulation Transfer Function. A minimum grade of C is required
if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee $49)
ETS 4236C (Formerly EST 4236C) 4 2 2
LASER ENGINEERING DESIGN
• Prerequisites: ETS 2230C or PHY 2049C and EET 3086C
This course will cover the fundamental physical processes relevant to
lasers and explore a variety of specific laser systems. Topics include
optical resonators, laser gain and oscillation, pulsed and CW laser
operation, system design considerations, and environmental effects.
Focus on an examination of existing semiconductors lasers, solid-state
lasers, fiber lasers, rare earth lasers, and systems that incorporate
lasers as a primary component. A minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee $49)
ETS 4256C (Formerly EST 4256C) 3 2 2
OPTICAL COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
• Prerequisites: ETS 1210C or ETS 2220C or PHY 2049C and
EGN 3428
Physics of optical communication components and applications to
communication systems. Topics include fiber attenuation and
dispersion, laser modulation, photo detection and noise, receiver and
transmitter designs, bit error rate calculations, and coherent
communications. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee $65.00)
ETS 4260 (Formerly EST 4260) 3 3 0
BIOPHOTONICS TECHNOLOGIES
• Prerequisites: ETS 2221C or PHY 2049C and EGN 3428
An overview of the field of biophotonics and the basic physics of lightbiomatter
interactions and tissue optics, light induced effects in biosystems,
diagnostic techniques and instrumentation, therapeutic
instrumentation and applications, optical biosensors, imaging, and
basics of optical tomography. A minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology,
B.S. degree requirement.
ETS 4280C (Formerly EST 4280C) 4 2 2
ADVANCED ELECTRO-OPTICAL DEVICES
• Prerequisites: ETS 2221 and ETS 4216C
This course aims to give a broad understanding of the physics and
technology of discrete and integrated optical and optoelectronic
components. The main focus is on important optoelectronic
components such as waveguides, lasers, detectors and other photonic
components. A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology, B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee $49)
ETS 4361 (Formerly EST 4361) 3 3 0
NANOTECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS AND APPLICATIONS
• Prerequisites: PHY 2049C and EET 3086C
An in-depth study of the fundamentals of nanoscience and
nanotechnology in a wide range of applications. The main facets of
nanotechnology are covered: nanomaterials, nanomechanics,
nanoelectronics, nanoscale heat transfer, nanophotonics, nanoscale
fluid mechanics, and nanobiotechnology. A minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Electrical and Computer Engineering
Technology, B.S. degree requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology
271
MTB 1329C 3 3 1
MATHEMATICS FOR ELECTRONICS
No prior electronics background is required. Students will be
introduced to basic arithmetic operations as well as selected prealgebra
topics, number notation and operation, quantities and units of
measurement, algebra fundamentals, and solving equations. This
applications-oriented course emphasizes mathematical techniques
used in DC/AC circuit analysis. Beginning with Ohm’s and Kirchoff’s
Law to analyze basic circuits, the student learns circuit simplifications
and solution techniques for more complex configurations. Phasors and
their application in AC circuits will also be covered. Some of these
applications will be demonstrated to students via a lab environment.
Emergency Medical Services Technology
(EMT/Paramedic)
To register for any of the Paramedic courses from EMS 2603 through
EMS 2668L which follow, you must apply and be accepted to the
Paramedic Certificate program.
EMS 1119 8 8 0
FUNDAMENTALS OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Minimum PERT scores of 84 on reading, 90 on
writing, and 96 on math or equivalent scores on other stateapproved
entry test; OR minimum grades of C in either
REA 0007C or EAP 1520C, and in either ENC 0015C or EAP 1540C,
and in MAT 0018C; OR a minimum PERT score of 96 or equivalent
score on other state-approved entry test or minimum grade of C
in MAT 0018C, and a minimum LOEP score of 106.
• Corequisites: EMS 1119L and EMS 1431L
Develops health professional capable of providing basic life support in
all aspects of emergency medical care. Students learn assessment in
medical and trauma emergencies, stabilization of illness/injury and
patient transport.
EMS 1119L 2 0 6
FUNDAMENTALS OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY
PRACTICE
• Corequisites: EMS 1119 and EMS 1431L
Laboratory exercises emphasize patient assessment, radio
communications, airway management, bandaging, splinting, CPR,
methodologies of shock treatment, obstetrical assistance, extrication,
MAST applications, working with cardiac monitors, setting up IVs and
others. (Special Fee: $110.00)
EMS 1431L 1 0 3
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN CLINICAL PRACTICUM
• Corequisites: EMS 1119 and EMS 1119L
Allows student to apply in clinical setting (emergency department and
field units) skills learned in lab portion of course. (Professional liability
insurance required.) (Special Fee: $60.00)
EMS 2603 6 6 0
PARAMEDIC I
• Prerequisite: BSC 1084
• Corequisites: EMS 2603L and EMS 2666L
Basic information on the structure and function and applied principles
of anatomy and physiology of the human body are critical knowledge
that should be acquired prior to entrance into the paramedic
technology certificate.
EMS 2603L 2 0 6
PARAMEDIC I LABORATORY
• Corequisites: EMS 2603 and EMS 2666L
EMS 2603L is designed to reinforce concepts and clinical skills learned
at the EMT level and to integrate this knowledge with beginning
advanced life support concepts and skills. The laboratory exercises
include a review of EMT skills, patient assessment, airway
management, venipuncture/intravenous therapy, pharmacology and
administration techniques. This course includes Modules 1, 2, and 3 of
the DOT National Standard Curriculum for Paramedic Programs.
(Special Fee: $180.00)
EMS 2604 8 8 0
PARAMEDIC II
• Prerequisites: EMS 2603, EMS 2603L and
EMS 2666L
• Corequisites: EMS 2604L and EMS 2667L
EMS 2604 is the second course in the sequence necessary for
completion of the Paramedic Certificate Program. The course is
designed to reinforce and expand upon the materials and clinical skills
learned at the EMT and Paramedic I level, and to integrate prior
learning with enhanced advanced life support concepts and skills.
Emphasis is placed on patient assessment and recognition of
significant findings, pre-hospital diagnosis and differential diagnosis,
treatment strategies, anatomy and physiology, pathophysiology, trauma
and the management of respiratory emergencies, cardiac emergencies,
endocrine and metabolic emergencies, neurological emergencies,
gastrointestinal/genitourinary emergencies, toxicological emergencies,
and environmental conditions. This course includes Modules 4 and 5
of the DOT National Standard Curriculum for Paramedic Programs.
EMS 2604L 2 0 6
PARAMEDIC II LABORATORY
• Corequisites: EMS 2604 and EMS 2667L
This course is designed to develop an EMS healthcare professional who
is capable of providing Basic and Advanced Life Support (BLS and ALS)
in all aspects of emergency care. During this competency-based lab,
students will develop, practice and master paramedic skills. Laboratory
exercises emphasize patient assessment, trauma and medical skills and
treatment strategies, ECG equipment and interpretation, cardiac
therapeutic interventions, application of computer skills including
mega-code scenarios, trauma scenarios, medical scenarios, ECG
recognition, and Advanced Cardiac Life Support resuscitative care. This
course includes Modules 4 and 5 of the DOT National Standard
Curriculum for Paramedic Programs. (Special Fee: $130.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Electronics Engineering Technology/Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology Emergency Medical Services Technology
272
EMS 2605 5 5 0
PARAMEDIC III
• Prerequisites: EMS 2604, EMS 2604L and EMS 2667L
• Corequisites: EMS 2605L and EMS 2668L
EMS 2605 is the third course in the sequence necessary for completion
of the Paramedic Program. The course is designed to reinforce and
expand upon the materials and clinical skills learned at the EMT, and
Paramedic I and II levels, and to integrate prior learning with enhanced
advanced life support concepts and skills. Emphasis is placed on
patient assessment and recognition of significant findings, pre-hospital
differential diagnosis and treatment strategies, pathophysiology,
gynecologic emergencies, obstetrical emergencies, neonatal
emergencies, pediatric emergencies, patients with special challenges,
and assessment based management. This course includes Modules 6
and 7 of the DOT National Standard Curriculum for Paramedic
Programs.
EMS 2605L 1 0 3
PARAMEDIC III LABORATORY
• Corequisites: EMS 2605 and EMS 2668L
EMS 2605L is designed to develop a health professional who is capable
of providing Basic and Advanced Life Support (BLS and ALS) in all
aspects of emergency care. During this competency-based lab students
will develop, practice and master paramedic skills. Laboratory
exercises emphasize obstetrical, and neonatal management, pediatric
assessment, pediatric airway management and ventilation, intravenous
and intra-osseous therapy, medication administration, Pediatric
Advanced Life Support (PALS) certification, advanced vascular
devices used in home health and assessment based management, and
operations. This course includes Modules 6 and 7 of the DOT National
Standard Curriculum for Paramedic Programs (Special Fee: $60.00)
EMS 2659L 4 0 12
PARAMEDIC IV (PROVISIONAL FIELD INTERNSHIP)
• Prerequisites: EMS 2605, EMS 2605L, and EMS 2668L
EMS 2659 is the last course necessary to complete the Paramedic
Certificate Program. Under the auspices of the medical director, this
course is designed to provide the student with intensive clinical
experience which fosters the development of leadership skills,
expands and further develops clinical skills, and allows for the
transition from observer to team leader in the professional
paramedic role. Documented student participation as the team leader
during a “code” must be completed during this course if these skills
have not been completed during the previous out-of-hospital clinical
practicum. This course includes Modules 8 of the DOT National
Standard Curriculum for Paramedic Programs. (Professional liability
insurance required.)
EMS 2666L 4 0 12
PARAMEDIC I CLINICAL
• Corequisites: EMS 2603 and EMS 2603L
Practicum providing the opportunity for each student to develop
competency in clinical skills within the hospital/field setting. Stresses
the integration of basic computer skills, application of EMT and
paramedic skills and techniques. Directed clinical experiences include
emergency departments, medical examiner's office (autopsy), geriatric
and mental health facilities. This course includes Modules 1, 2, and 3 of
the DOT National Standard Curriculum for Paramedic Programs.
(Professional liability insurance required.) (Special Fee: $80.00)
EMS 2667L 4 0 12
PARAMEDIC II CLINICAL
• Corequisites: EMS 2604 and EMS 2604L
Practicum providing the opportunity in hospital and out-of-hospital
settings for each student to develop competency in clinical skills
necessary to serve as a member of an advanced life support team.
Stresses the integration of EMT and paramedic responsibilities so the
student gains knowledge and confidence in clinical problem solving.
Directed clinical experiences include pre-hospital, emergency
departments and critical care units. This course includes Modules 4
and 5 of the DOT National Standard Curriculum for Paramedic
Programs. (Professional liability insurance required.)
EMS 2668L 3 0 9
PARAMEDIC III CLINICAL
• Corequisites: EMS 2605 and EMS 2605L
This practicum stresses clinical application of advanced procedures
and theories in pediatrics and OB. Directed experiences will be in
neonatology, obstetrics, physician mentorships, pediatric emergency
departments, and clinics. Local hospitals will be utilized. This course
includes Modules 6 and 7 of the DOT National Standard Curriculum for
Paramedic Programs. (Professional liability insurance required.)
EMS 2930 1 - 5 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN EMS
Designed for students interested in obtaining additional skills as EMT
or paramedic. Provides clinical experience and/or didactic activities.
May require student to provide professional liability insurance.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 10 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Special fee may be required.)
Engineering
EGN 1111C 3 2 2
ENGINEERING COMPUTER GRAPHICS
• Prerequisite: High school trigonometry
Spatial visualization, sketching and graphical presentation as a form of
computerized engineering communication. Engineering drawing,
descriptive geometry and graphical solution techniques using
computer software. (Special Fee: $28.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Emergency Medical Services Technology Engineering
273
EGN 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ENGINEERING
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in engineering based on the needs and areas of interest
of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as
part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
EGS 1006 1 2 1
INTRODUCTION TO THE ENGINEERING PROFESSION
This course is an overview of academic and professional requirements
in various engineering disciplines. It covers various concepts such as
engineering ethics, effective team building skills, technical
presentation skills, and networking.
EGS 1007 1 2 1
ENGINEERING CONCEPTS AND METHODS
Introduction to computer software applications involving spreadsheets
(Excel), symbolic processing (Mathcad), computer aided drafting
(AutoCAD), and procedural programming (MATLAB) in order to solve a
variety of engineering-related problems. (Special Fee: $38.00)
EGS 2004 3 3 0
ELECTRICAL NETWORKS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of a C in PHY 2049C and MAP
2302 or departmental approval
Analysis and design of linear circuits, transients, AC analysis, power
calculations, three-phase circuits, and Laplace Transforms.
EGS 2025 3 3 0
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS FOR ENGINEERS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2312
Axioms of probability, combinatorial and geometrical probability;
probability distributions; measures of location and dispersion;
sampling and sampling distributions; estimations and tests of
hypotheses, and engineering applications.
EGS 2310 3 3 0
ENGINEERING ANALYSIS-STATICS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2311 and PHY 2048C
• Prerequisite or Corequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2312
Fundamental concepts of mechanics, including resultants of force
systems, free-body diagrams, equilibrium of rigid bodies, and analysis
of structures.
EGS 2321 3 3 0
ENGINEERING ANALYSIS-DYNAMICS
• Prerequisite: EGS 2310 with a grade of C or better
• Prerequisite or Corequisite: MAC 2313
Kinematics and kinetics of particles and rigid bodies; mass and
acceleration, work and energy, impulse and momentum.
EGS 2373 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in PHY 2049C
or departmental approval
• Prerequisite or Corequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAP 2302
Fundamental laws of electrical circuits and circuit analysis;
fundamentals of electronics power systems.
EGS 2930 1 - 4 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ENGINEERING
For students interested in special topics that further explore
engineering-related concepts. May include laboratory and/or field
work. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of
8 credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
EGS 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN ENGINEERING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including EGS 1006, EGS 1007, EGS 2310, and MAC 2311.
The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
English
AML 2011 3 3 0
SURVEY IN AMERICAN LITERATURE:
COLONIAL PERIOD TO CIVIL WAR
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Representative authors and selections. Gordon Rule course in which
the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills
through multiple assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if AML
2011 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements.
AML 2021 3 3 0
SURVEY IN AMERICAN LITERATURE:
CIVIL WAR TO PRESENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or 1101H or
IDH 1110
Representative authors and selections. Gordon Rule course in which
the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills
through multiple assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if AML
2021 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Engineering English
274
AML 2021H 3 3 0
SURVEY IN AMERICAN LITERATURE:
CIVIL WAR TO PRESENT - HONORS
Same as AML2021. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
COM 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN COMMUNICATIONS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110 or SPC 1608
and JOU 1100 or MMC 1000 or MMC 2100. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
CRW 2001 3 3 0
CREATIVE WRITING AND ADVANCED COMPOSITION
• Prerequisite: ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110
An interactive writing course in which students develop creative
writing skills in several literary genres: short stories, poetry, plays,
novels, personal essays or magazine articles.
CRW 2100 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO FICTION
• Prerequisite: CRW 2001
Introduction to Fiction is a fiction-genre specific class. Students will
write original work to be submitted for critique and will critique the
work of other students in interactive workshops during class.
Students will be introduced to the conventions of fiction through
selected readings.
CRW 2102 3 3 0
FICTION II
• Prerequisite: CRW 2100
Fiction II is a fiction-genre specific class. Students will write original
work to be submitted for critique and will critique the work of other
students in interactive workshops during class. Students will continue
to explore the conventions of fiction through selected readings and
refine their understanding of contemporary fiction through reader
response assignments.
CRW 2300 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO POETRY
• Prerequisite: CRW 2001
Introduction to poetry is a poetry-genre specific class. Students will
write original work to be submitted for critique and will critique the
work of other students in interactive workshops during class.
Students will be introduced to the conventions of poetry through
selected readings.
CRW 2301 3 3 0
POETRY II
• Prerequisite: CRW 2300
Poetry II is a poetry-genre specific class. Students will write original
work to be submitted for critique and will critique the work of other
students in interactive workshops during class. Students will continue
to explore the conventions of poetry through selected readings and
refine their understanding of contemporary poetry through reader
response assignments.
CRW 2710 (Formerly CRW 2400) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO SCRIPTWRITING
• Prerequisite: ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110 or department
approval
Introduces scriptwriting for stage, television, and feature films.
Emphasis on story development, structure, character and plot
development, format, and marketing.
CRW 2930 1-3 var. 1-3 var. 0
SELECTED TOPICS IN CREATIVE WRITING
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in creative writing based on the needs and areas of the
class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as part
of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for up to 6 hours
of credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
ENC 0015C 3 3 2
DEVELOPMENTAL WRITING I
(Formerly ENC 0011, ENC 1001, ENC 1013, EH 140, ENC 0010)
• Prerequisite: Appropriate score on PERT or other approved
assessment
Referral also on basis of diagnostic writing sample. Emphasis on
standard American usage and grammatically correct sentences in
unified paragraph form. Minimum grade of C is required for successful
completion. Upon successful completion, degree-seeking student must
take ENC 0025C. ENC 0015C credit does not apply toward any associate
degree. (Special Fee: $30.00)
ENC 0025C 3 3 2
DEVELOPMENTAL WRITING II
(Formerly ENC 0021, ENC 1002, ENC 1025, EH 141, ENC 0012)
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 0015C or appropriate
score on PERT or other approved assessment.
Prepares students to plan and write grammatically correct paragraphs
and short essays. A passing score on the departmental final is required
for a minimum final course grade of C, which is required for successful
completion of this course. Upon successful completion, student has
met the writing requirement for entry into ENC 1101. ENC 0025C credit
does not apply toward any associate degree. (Special Fee $30.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
English English
275
ENC 0025N (Formerly ENC 0012N) 0 0 2
INTENSIVE WRITING TUTORIAL
• Prerequisite: Completion of EAP 1640C or ENC 0025C with a
grade of I
This course is designed for students who successfully completed the
course work for EAP 1640C or ENC 0025C but failed to earn a passing
grade on the departmental final. Students may be eligible for this
course after their first attempt in EAP 1640C orENC 0025C. Students
will sign a contract with the dean of the department and work with
assigned instructors to prepare for the Basic Skills Exit Test. Faculty
recommendation is required. This course will not appear on a
transcript because it is a non-gradable course. (Special Fee: $30.00)
ENC 1101 (Formerly ENC 1103, EH 151) 3 3 0
FRESHMAN COMPOSITION I
• Prerequisites: Score of 99 on writing component of PERT or
equivalent score on other state-approved entry test or minimum
grade of C in ENC 0025C or EAP 1640C, and a score of 104 on
reading component of PERT or equivalent score on other stateapproved
entry test or minimum grade of C in REA 0017C or EAP
1620C.
Development of essay form, including documented essay; instruction
and practice in expository writing. Emphasis on clarity of central and
support ideas, adequate development, logical organization, coherence,
appropriate citing of primary and/or secondary sources, and
grammatical and mechanical accuracy. Gordon Rule course in which
the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills
through multiple assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if ENC
1101 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and General Education
Requirements.
ENC 1101H (Formerly ENC 1121, ENC 1213) 3 3 0
FRESHMAN COMPOSITION I - HONORS
Same as ENC 1101. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
ENC 1102 (Formerly ENC 1136, EH 152) 3 3 0
FRESHMAN COMPOSITION II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or
IDH 1110
Application of skills learned in ENC 1101. Emphasis on style; use of
library; reading and evaluating available sources; planning, writing,
and documenting short research paper. Gordon Rule course in which
the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills
through multiple assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if
ENC1102 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements.
ENC 1102H (Formerly ENC 1122, ENC 1226) 3 3 0
FRESHMAN COMPOSITION II - HONORS
Same as ENC 1102. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
ENC 1210 3 3 0
TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION
• Prerequisite: ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110
Emphasis on clear, simple and precise English. Writing of business
letters, office memos, technical reports, proposals and
recommendations. Practice in collecting and organizing data and
preparing report formats. Includes oral reports and interview
techniques.
ENC 2341 (Formerly ENC 2302) 3 3 0
ADVANCED CREATIVE WRITING - LITERARY MAGAZINE
• Prerequisite: ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110 or department
approval
Writing in genre of student’s choice. Literary criticism and production
of College literary magazine.
ENG 2100 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO FILM
Techniques of American, British, and foreign-language films. Emphasis
on films of ‘30s through contemporary cinema.
ENG 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ENGLISH
Special topics in writing and/or literature. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
ENL 2012 3 3 0
SURVEY IN ENGLISH LITERATURE: 1300-1800
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
British literature though 18th century. Gordon Rule course in which
the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills
through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is
required if ENL 2012 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general
education requirements.
ENL 2022 3 3 0
SURVEY IN ENGLISH LITERATURE: 1800 TO PRESENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
British literature of 19th and 20th centuries. Gordon Rule course in
which the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing
skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is
required if ENL 2022 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general
education requirements.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
English English
276
LIT 2090 3 3 0
CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or
ENC 1101H or IDH 1110
Representative works of contemporary poets, novelists, short story
writers, dramatists, and non-fiction writers especially significant in the
last thirty years. Emphasis on issues and ideas related to present and
future. Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to
demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple writing
assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if LIT 2090 is used to
satisfy Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
LIT 2090H 3 3 0
CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE - HONORS
Same as LIT 2090. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
LIT 2110 3 3 0
SURVEY IN WORLD LITERATURE: BEGINNING THROUGH
RENAISSANCE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Major poetry, fiction, drama, and essays. Gordon Rule course in
which the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing
skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is
required if LIT 2110 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general
education requirements.
LIT 2120 3 3 0
SURVEY IN WORLD LITERATURE: ENLIGHTENMENT
TO PRESENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Major poetry, fiction, drama and essays. Gordon Rule course in which
the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills
through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is required
if LIT 2120 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements.
LIT 2120H 3 3 0
SURVEY IN WORLD LITERATURE: ENLIGHTENMENT TO PRESENTHONORS
Same as LIT 2120. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
LIT 2174 3 3 0
MULTIMEDIA LITERATURE AND THE HOLOCAUST
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H
or IDH 1110
This course explores literary characteristics inherent in various media
including (but not limited to) Holocaust-related historical text,
documentary film, comics (graphic narrative), survivor narratives, preand
post-Nazi art and contemporary major motion pictures. The
examination includes critical analyses of textual, visual, syntactical,
mechanical and thematic conventional similarities found in traditional
textual "literature" and in the structure, syntax and language of visual
media. Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to
demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple writing
assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon
Rule and general education requirements.
LIT 2174H 3 3 0
MULTIMEDIA LITERATURE AND THE HOLOCAUST – HONORS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H
or IDH 1110
Same as LIT 2174. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
LIT 2955 3 3 0
HOLOCAUST STUDIES TRIP ABROAD
• Prerequisite: LIT 2174 or LIT 2174H or department approval
This course is a companion course to LIT 2174 or LIT 2174H, Students
who have completed the classroom course LIT 2174 or 2174H will be
eligible to take part in a Holocaust-related trip to Poland and other
sites of significance related to the Holocaust. The trip will be an
extension of the classroom content and be coordinated with the
Study Abroad Office.
English as a Second Language for Academic
Purposes
EAP 02816 6 0
HIGH BEGINNING COMBINED SKILLS
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency
Students develop sufficient elementary skill in English used for
academic purposes to understand high-frequency vocabulary in oral
contexts and respond to simple questions and phrases. Additionally,
they will comprehend basic academic-level text, express themselves on
personal topics in writing, develop control of basic grammatical
structures, and use computer-assisted language learning facilities.
Competencies: 1) elementary academic speaking/listening skills, 2)
basic reading and vocabulary skills, 3) guided discourse writing skills,
4) basic grammatical structures and patterns, and 5) basic skill in
using language learning software. Required lab work is a homework
component of this course. Minimum grade of C is required for
successful completion. A departmental final exam is required. Credit
does not apply toward any associate degree. (Special Fee: $30.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
English English as a Second Language for Academic Purposes
277
EAP 0300C 3 3 1
LOW INTERMEDIATE SPEECH FOR NON-NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0281
Students develop basic speaking and listening skills necessary for
participating in classroom discussions, with an introduction to oral
presentation and listening skills. Competencies: 1) basic academic
speaking skills; 2) introduction to listening and note taking strategies;
2) classroom interaction skills. Required lab work is a homework
component of this course. Credit does not apply toward any associate
degree. Minimum grade of C is required for successful completion.
(Special Fee $30.00)
EAP 0320C 3 3 1
LOW INTERMEDIATE READING FOR NON-NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0281
Students develop the ability to read text on familiar and basic
academic topics with an emphasis on vocabulary. Competencies:
1) developing base-line English vocabulary, 2) locating key concepts,
3) reading and understanding, and 4) understanding and using
information resources. Required lab work is a homework component
of this course. Credit does not apply toward any associate degree.
Minimum grade C required for successful completion.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 0340C 3 3 1
LOW INTERMEDIATE COMPOSITION
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0281
• Prerequisite or corequisite: EAP 0360C
Students develop the ability to use writing-related technology and plan,
write, revise, and edit sentences and paragraphs at the lowintermediate
level. Required lab work is a homework component of
this course. Credit does not apply toward any associate degree.
Minimum grade of C is required for successful completion.
(Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 0360C 3 3 1
LOW INTERMEDIATE STRUCTURE
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0281
Students develop the ability to use low-intermediate grammatical
structures, verb tenses, and parts of speech appropriate to writing and
speaking. Required lab work is a homework component of this course.
Credit does not apply toward any associate degree. Minimum grade of C
is required for successful completion. (Special Fee $30.00)
EAP 0400C 3 3 1
INTERMEDIATE SPEECH FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0300C
Students continue to develop speaking and listening skills necessary
for participation in classroom discussions, with an emphasis on oral
presentation. Competencies: 1) intermediate academic speaking skills
with introduction to oral presentation; 2) listening comprehension and
note taking strategies; 3) classroom interaction skills. Required lab
work is a homework component of this course. Credit does not apply
to any associate degree. Minimum grade of C is required for successful
completion. (Special Fee $30.00)
EAP 0420C 3 3 1
INTERMEDIATE READING FOR NON-NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0320C
Students develop the ability to comprehend longer texts of limited
length and difficulty on a variety of academically-related topics, they
expand vocabulary knowledge, and begin to apply critical reading skills.
Competencies: 1) improving English vocabulary, 2) locating key
concepts, 3) reading and understanding, 4) understanding and using
information resources, and 5) reading for personal enrichment. Required
lab work is a homework component of this course. Credit does not apply
to any associate degree. Minimum grade of C is required for successful
completion. (Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 0440C 3 3 1
INTERMEDIATE COMPOSITION FOR NON-NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0340C.
• Prerequisite or corequisite: EAP 0460C
Students develop the ability to use writing-related technology and plan,
write, revise, edit sentences and paragraphs and/or essays at the
intermediate level. Required lab work is a homework component of this
course. Credit does not apply toward any associate degree. Minimum
grade of C is required for successful completion. (Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 0460C 3 3 1
INTERMEDIATE STRUCTURE
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0360C
Students develop the ability to use intermediate level grammatical
structures, verb tenses, and parts of speech appropriate to writing and
speaking. Required lab work is a homework component of this course.
Credit does not apply toward any associate degree. Minimum grade of
C is required for successful completion. (Special Fee $30.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
English as a Second Language for Academic Purposes English as a Second Language for Academic Purposes
278
EAP 1500C 3 3 1
HIGH INTERMEDIATE SPEECH
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0400C
Students develop communication, organization, and pronunciation
skills necessary for effective academic presentation and discussion,
with an introduction to lecture note taking. Competencies: 1) speech
preparation and delivery; 2) academic lecture comprehension and
note taking; 3) general academic communication skills. Required lab
work is a homework component of this course. Minimum grade of C is
required for successful completion. (Special Fee $30.00)
EAP 1520C 3 3 1
HIGH INTERMEDIATE READING
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0420C
Students develop ability to comprehend longer texts on a variety of
academically-related topics by applying appropriate reading strategies.
Competencies: 1) improving English vocabulary, 2) locating key
concepts, 3) reading critically, 4) reading a variety of materials, such as
texts, periodicals, journals, and electronic materials 5) reading to
enhance personal life, and 6) developing effective study habits.
Required lab work is a homework component of this course. Minimum
grade of C is required for successful completion. (Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 1540C 3 3 1
HIGH INTERMEDIATE COMPOSITION FOR NON-NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0440C
Students develop the ability to use writing-related technology and
plan, write, revise, edit sentences and paragraphs, and essays at the
high-intermediate level. Required lab work is a homework component
of this course. Minimum grade of C is required for successful
completion. (Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 1560C 3 3 1
HIGH INTERMEDIATE STRUCTURE
FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 0460C
• Corequisite: EAP 1640C
Students develop the ability to use high-intermediate grammatical
structures, verb tenses, and parts of speech appropriate to writing and
speaking. Required lab work is a homework component of this course.
Minimum grade of C is required for successful completion.
(Special Fee $30.00)
EAP 1600 3 3 0
ADVANCED SPEECH FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 1500C
Students further develop communication skills necessary for full
participation in mainstream college classes, including comprehension
of extensive discourse. Competencies: 1) mainstream academic
communication skills, 2) extemporaneous and impromptu academic
oral presentations, 3) academic lecture and extensive discourse
comprehension, and 4) academic oral/aural skills refinement for
college success. Required lab work is a homework component of this
course. In order to pass this course, students must earn a grade of C or
better in course work and a passing score on the Comprehensive
Departmental Final Exam.
EAP 1620C 3 3 1
ADVANCED READING FOR NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: Demonstration of required level of English
proficiency or minimum grade of C in EAP 1520C
Students develop ability to comprehend and interpret authentic
college-level texts in content areas by applying appropriate reading
strategies. Competencies: 1) improving English vocabulary, 2) locating
key concepts, 3) reading critically, 4) reading for study and enjoyment,
and 5) reading a variety of materials, such as texts, periodicals,
journals, and electronic materials. Required lab work is a homework
component of this course. A minimum grade of C is required for
successful completion. (Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 1640C 3 3 1
ADVANCED COMPOSITION FOR NON-NATIVE
SPEAKERS OF ENGLISH
• Prerequisite: EAP 1540C
• Prerequisite or corequisite: EAP 1560C
Students develop the ability to use writing-related technology and
plan, write, revise, edit sentences and paragraphs, and essays at the
advanced level. Required lab work is a homework component of this
course. In order to pass this course, students must earn a passing score
on the Comprehensive Departmental Final Exam, and a minimum
grade of C is required for successful completion. (Special Fee: $30.00)
EAP 2930 1 - 4 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in English as a second language based on the
needs and areas of interest of the class and professor. May include
laboratory and/or field work as part of the class. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credits provided different
topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $35.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
English as a Second Language for Academic Purposes English as a Second Language for Academic Purposes
279
Film
You must apply and be accepted to the Selective Admission Advanced
Courses in the Film Production Technology A.S. Degree program to
register for any of the following film courses: FIL 2200C, FIL 2450, FIL
2461, FIL 2505, FIL 2537, FIL 2543, FIL 2552, FIL 2561 and FIL 2580.
You must apply and be accepted to the Film - Motion Picture Post-
Production Advanced Technical Certificate program to register for any
of the following film courses: FIL 2543, FIL 2544 and FIL 2571.
FIL 1420 (Formerly FIL 1270) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO THE FILM PROCESS
Study of film-making process from concept to completion with special
emphasis on relationship between various job categories and specific
role of "below-the-line" production technician.
FIL 2030 (Formerly FIL 2400) 3 3 0
HISTORY OF MOTION PICTURES
Overview of film as an industry, mass medium and art form.
FIL 2100 3 2 1
SCREENWRITING
Introduction to the basic techniques of screenwriting. Exercises in
story structure, dialogue and character development. Introduction to
screenwriting software. (Special Fee: $25.00)
FIL 2130 (Formerly FIL 2116) 3 3 0
ADVANCED SCREENWRITING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in FIL 2100
This course advances a student’s knowledge of the screenwriting
process with emphasis on completing and marketing a story.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
FIL 2432C (Formerly FIL 2200C) 4 1 10
FILM PRODUCTION
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
Participation by student as a technician in College-sponsored film
production. Multiple credit course. Must be repeated for 12 credits, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $457.50)
FIL 2450 (Formerly FIL 2273) 3 1 3
FILM GRIPPING
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
Study of use of gripping skills and equipment as related to feature film
production. Emphasis on strategies necessary to anticipate shooting
needs and problem-solving.
FIL 2461 2 2 0
ART OF CINEMATOGRAPHY
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
This course will focus on the art of visual storytelling through lighting
and camera movement.
FIL 2505 (Formerly FIL 2272) 3 1 3
FILM LIGHTING
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
Study of film lighting techniques, practices and equipment. Includes
lighting theory, power distribution systems and color theory. Special
emphasis on working as part of a film production team.
FIL 2537 (Formerly FIL 2275) 3 2 2
FILM SOUND
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film Production
A.S. Degree
Focuses on theory and practice of production and post-production
film sound. Special emphasis on techniques of sound imaging in filmmaking
process. This course includes learning activity designed to
ensure competence in the basic use of computers.
FIL 2543 (Formerly FIL 2000) 4 3 2
POST-PRODUCTION/SOUND FOR MOTION PICTURES
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
Special emphasis on sound design, dialogue editing, and ADR looping,
creating sound effects, including Foley, as these things apply to feature
film post-production.
FIL 2552 (Formerly FIL 2274) 3 2 2
FILM EDITING
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
Acquaints students with techniques and aesthetics of film editing.
Emphasis on visual and audio post-production. This course includes
learning activity designed to ensure competence in the basic use of
computers.
FIL 2580 (Formerly FIL 2271) 3 1 3
FILM CAMERA TECHNIQUES
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Advanced courses in Film
Production A.S. Degree
Prepares student to function in all capacities as a member of the
motion picture camera department. Focuses on care and handling of
equipment, documentation and solving film-shooting problems.
FIL 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN FILM
Seminar for students interested in research, discussion and
observation of special topics in film and film production. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided
different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Film Film
280
FIL 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN FILM
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including FIL 2100 and DIG 2431 and DIG 2411; 2.0 overall
GPA. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator
or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide
override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides
students with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
FIL 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN FILM TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, completion
of the limited access portion of the Valencia Film Production
Technology Program and Program Director’s approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Finance
FIN 2000 (Formerly BRC 2001) 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF FINANCE
A study of business finance in the American economy, money,
monetary systems, monetary standards, flow of funds, sources of
funds, money markets, capital markets, savings, channeling savings
into investments, corporate financial structures, financing large
businesses, financing small businesses, financing real estate, public
finance, fiscal policies, international finance, and international
financial policies.
FIN 2051 3 3 0
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GEB 1350
This course is designed for the student to learn the basic concepts and
principles of international finance, with consideration of the financial
environment, transactions, and flows. Exchange rates, risks, and
government policies affecting business are analyzed as well as
management policies and decisions.
FIN 2010 3 3 0
PERSONAL INVESTMENTS
Introduction to securities markets, types of personal investments,
research tools, investment strategies and portfolio management.
FIN 2100 3 3 0
PERSONAL FINANCE
Introduction to personal financial planning, including personal
financial management, taxes, risk management, investments,
retirement planning and estate planning.
French
FRE 1000 3 3 0
BASIC FRENCH
Emphasis on everyday use of the language, integrating basic grammar,
vocabulary, composition and culture through a conversational
approach to French. Not open to native speakers. (Special Fee: $36.00)
FRE 1120 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY FRENCH I
Emphasis on everyday use of the language, integrating basic grammar,
vocabulary, composition and culture through a conversational
approach to French. Not open to native speakers. A minimum grade of
C is required to pass this course if being used to satisfy the Foreign
Language Proficiency Requirement.
FRE 1121 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY FRENCH II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in FRE 1120 or department
approval
Continuation of FRE 1120. Emphasis on everyday use of the language,
integrating basic grammar, vocabulary, composition and culture
through a conversational approach to French. Not open to native
speakers. A minimum grade of C is required to pass this course if being
used to satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency Requirement.
FRE 2200 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE FRENCH I
• Prerequisite: FRE 1101, FRE 1121, or department approval
Conversational approach with readings adapted from French
newspapers, magazines, short stories, and film. Increasing awareness
and understanding of the French culture.
FRE 2201 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE FRENCH II
• Prerequisite: FRE 2200 or department approval
Conversational approach with readings adapted from French
newspapers, magazines, short stories, and film. Increasing awareness
and understanding of the French culture.
FRE 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN FRENCH
For students interested in special topics that further explore the field
of French. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6
credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Film french
281
FRE 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN FRENCH
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including a foreign language course at the intermediate
level. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator
or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide
override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides
students with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Geography
GEA 1000 3 3 0
WORLD GEOGRAPHY
Introduction to basic geographic concepts and terms, problems of
conservation of natural resources and human and natural resources of
major regions of world with in-depth study of one or more countries in
each region.
GEO 1200 3 3 0
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY
A study of the relationship between the natural environment and man.
Includes: weather, climate, soils, biogeography, land forms and man’s
place and activities within his/her environment.
Geology
ESC 1000 (Formerly GLY 1001) 3 3 0
EARTH SCIENCES
Study of earth sciences with emphasis on geology. Additional topics
selected from astronomy, oceanography and meteorology. Emphasis on
Florida.
GLY 2010C 4 3 3
PHYSICAL GEOLOGY
Deals with physical structure of earth. Includes effects of volcanic
activity, glaciation, diastrophism (formation of major crustal features:
continents, ocean beds, folds, faults, and mountain building), tectonics
(structural deformation and readjustment of crust), sediments,
erosional features, rock and mineral formation along with new and
current geological developments. (Special Fee: $56.00)
GLY 2100C 4 3 3
HISTORICAL GEOLOGY
History of the earth and the evolution of life as evidenced in the rock
and fossil record; principles of geologic and paleontologic research;
evolution of the dinosaurs, mass extinctions, and effects of the past
continental movements on the diversity of life. (Special Fee: $56.00)
GLY 2100H 4 3 3
HISTORICAL GEOLOGY - HONORS
Same as GLY 2100. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
(Special Fee: $56.00)
GLY 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN GEOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Department approval.
Selected topics in geology based on the needs and areas of interest of
the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field work as
part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
German
GER 1000 3 3 0
BASIC GERMAN
Emphasis on everyday use of the language, integrating basic grammar,
vocabulary, composition, and culture through a conversational
approach to German. Not open to native speakers.
GER 1120 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY GERMAN I
Emphasis on everyday use of the language, integrating basic grammar,
vocabulary, composition, and culture through a conversational
approach to German. Not open to native speakers. A minimum grade
of C is required to pass this course if being used to satisfy the Foreign
Language Proficiency Requirement.
GER 1121 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY GERMAN II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GER 1120 or department
approval
Continuation of fundamental skills in German comprehension,
expression, and structure. Increasing awareness and understanding of
the culture. A minimum grade of C is required to pass this course if
being used to satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency Requirement.
Graphic and Interactive Design
GRA 1109 3 3 0
HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
This course explores the contemporary, historical, cultural and
technological trends and advances which influence graphic design
industry practices of today.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
french Graphic and Interactive Design
282
GRA 1142C 5 5 2
GRAPHIC DESIGN ESSENTIALS
An introduction to a variety of visual communication principles,
methods and careers in today’s computer age. Typography, design,
layout, color, production, and an introduction to an industry-standard
personal computer and software for production of graphics and
multimedia are all explored. This course includes learning activity
designed to ensure competence in oral communication.
(Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 1203C (Formerly GRA 1540C) 3 3 1
LAYOUT, DESIGN AND COPY PREPARATION
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in ART 1201C and GRA 1142
or department approval
A practical course in planning and visualizing advertising and
industrial copy. The student converts rough ideas and designs into
comprehensive layouts from which are prepared print-ready layouts.
Experiments are conducted with various media involving design,
balance, and color psychology. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 1206C (Formerly GRA 1530C) 3 3 1
FUNDAMENTALS OF TYPOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in GRA 1142 or
DIG 2000C and GRA 1413 or department approval
Includes the history and classification of type. Contemporary type
usage will be explored. Projects in type design and production include
the use of a personal computer and industry-standard software.
(Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 1413 1 1 0
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT FOR DESIGNERS
Students will learn basic job hunting skills, how to prepare a résumé,
prepare for a job interview, learn to write a cover letter, and learn how
to develop and present a portfolio.
GRA 1933C (Formerly ART 1933) 3 2 1
FUNDAMENTALS OF CREATIVE THINKING
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in ART1300C and GRA1142C
or departmental approval
A course designed to encourage creative thinking and problem solving
for graphics students through group and individual projects, activities
and discussions. The course will include a study of characteristics of a
creative mind, alternative design approaches, creative process,
creative problem solving, assessing and increasing growth of creative
potential. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 1951C 1 2 0
PORTFOLIO REVIEW
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in GRA 2143 or in
GRA 2182 or department approval
A course in which the student develops a portfolio and presentation
skills for employment in the graphic design or multimedia profession.
Additionally, students design a personal letterhead for their interview
request letter, a business card and a self-promotional piece. As final
evaluation for the course, students undergo a portfolio review.
(Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2113C (Formerly GRA 2545C) 3 1 2
ADVANCED GRAPHIC DESIGN I
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in GRA 1203C and GRA
1206C or department approval
Addresses practical problems relevant to contemporary industry
standards in graphic communications. Emphasis on producing layouts
and comprehensive in black and white, and color. Various up-to-date
methods of production utilized. (Special fee: $46.00)
GRA 2121C (Formerly GRA 2820) 3 3 1
PUBLICATION DESIGN
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in GRA 1203C and GRA
1206C and GRA 1933 or department approval
This course is designed to provide students with hands on usage of
high-end publishing software and hardware for the production of
quality publications. A focus on good graphic design skills will include:
composition, layout, typography, pagination, style, balance, format and
project planning. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2132C (Formerly GRA 2832) 3 3 1
ADVANCED INTERACTIVE DESIGN
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2100C or GRA 1149
and DIG 2500C or GRA 2131 or department approval
Students learn advanced techniques to produce interactive design
projects. Students design projects through various steps of
development, implementation, testing, and final output. Special
attention is given to scripting, design considerations for output media
and system configurations.Vector and bitmapped graphics software,
video, sound, and authoring software will be utilized.
(Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2141C (Formerly GRA 2841) 3 3 1
WEB PAGE DESIGN
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GRA2201C and GRA1206C
and DIG2100C or departmental approval
Provides instruction in the most current applications being used in the
industry for production of web pages. Proper coding of the pages with
consideration of various platforms will be provided. Special emphasis
on good design, proper usage of typography and images for delivery on
the Internet will be covered. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2143C (Formerly GRA 2842) 3 3 1
ADVANCED WEB PAGE DESIGN
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2100C or GRA 1149
and DIG 2500C or GRA 2131 and GRA 2141 or department approval
Advanced tools and techniques will be taught enabling students to
produce sophisticated, interactive web sites according to audience
needs and capabilities. Understanding of web site maintenance and
administration will be covered. (Special Fee: $46.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Graphic and Interactive Design Graphic and Interactive Design
283
GRA 2151C (Formerly GRA 2743C) 3 2 2
ILLUSTRATING
• Prerequisites: ART 1300C and a minimum grade of C in GRA 1142
or in both GRA 1500 and GRA 1800 or department approval
A basic course in the application of freehand sketching to commercial
problems. Various surfaces and techniques, as well as color, and black
and white mediums will be explored. Also included are studies in
planning, production and completion of finished artwork.
(Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2156C (Formerly GRA 2801) 3 3 1
ADOBE ILLUSTRATOR
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in ART 1300C and DIG 2000C
or GRA 1142 or department approval
A course covering the concepts of electronic publishing and the ability
to create and manipulate full color graphic illustrations. Students will
receive training on Adobe Illustrator or the most current vector
illustration program standard in the industry. Class lecture will be
supported with handouts and demonstrations. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2160C (Formerly GRA 2803) 3 3 1
COMPUTER ANIMATION
• Prerequisites: ART 1300C and a minimum grade of C in GRA 2156
or department approval
Instruction in the use of a personal computer to generate 2-D images
and incorporate them into animated sequences. Principles of
traditional animation, storyboarding and animation effects will be
explored and applied to computer imagery. Students will become
familiar with the necessary hardware and software to create and
output animated images. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2182C (Formerly GRA 2546C) 3 1 2
ADVANCED GRAPHIC DESIGN II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GRA 2113C or department
approval
Comprehensive course involving in-depth study of advanced design
problem solving. Includes marketing strategies, exploring design
solutions, dealing with clients, estimating costs, presentation and
production techniques. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2201C (Formerly GRA 2577) 3 3 1
ELECTRONIC IMAGING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GRA 1142 or department
approval
Utilizing the most current industry-standard image editing software;
this course is designed for the intermediate-to-experienced graphic
designer who wishes to integrate black and white, or color imagery into
page layout or web design projects. Program features will be utilized to
create original bitmapped images, edit scanned images, design
graphics for web pages, and import images rendered in other
applications. Emphasis will be placed on the application of good
design principles through projects based on typical assignments within
the industry. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2207C 3 3 1
ADVANCED IMAGE EDITING
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in GRA 2156 and GRA 2201
or department approval
Exploration of advanced image processing techniques. Students will
learn how to prepare images for various output venues, including print,
web and multimedia publishing, animation and video. Projects focus on
resolution, color management, image and texture creation, and special
effects. Industry-standard hardware and software will be utilized.
(Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2225C 3 3 1
ADVANCED TYPOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in GRA 1206C and GRA 1413
This course provides students with the opportunity to advance their
typographic understanding and application beyond the fundamental
level. Students will be given the opportunity to design advanced
typographic solutions for their visual portfolio. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2310C (Formerly GRA 2635C) 3 3 1
GRAPHIC REPRODUCTION PROCESSES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GRA 2121 or department
approval
Fundamentals of single and multi-color layout and prepress
production will be introduced. Traditional production techniques and
current usage of a personal computer, software and peripherals will be
studied. Course includes lecture and field trips to local graphic arts
production and printing facilities. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2425 3 3 0
BUSINESS AND ETHICS OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in GRA 2156C
This course helps students understand fundamental business
operations, procedures, contracts, copyright laws, etiquette, and
ethical concerns specific to the graphic design industry.
GRA 2723C 3 3 1
CSS DESIGN
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in DIG 2100C or GRA 1149
and GRA 2141 or department approval
Students will apply the fundamentals of visual communication and
typography acquired in prerequisite courses and advance their
knowledge of CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) to plan, design, and
develop standards-compliant, visually attractive Web pages. Students
will learn to separate style and content from structure to create
effective, accessible Web pages. (Special Fee: $46.00)
GRA 2755C 3 3 1
WEB DEVELOPMENT FOR DESIGNERS
• Prerequisites:Minimum grades of C in GRA 2143C and GRA 2132
This course allows front-end web designers to further develop their
skills and understanding in current industry-standard back-end web
development. (Special Fee: $46.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Graphic and Interactive Design Graphic and Interactive Design
284
GRA 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN GRAPHIC ARTS
• Prerequisite: Department approval
In-depth study of various advanced concepts, methods and techniques
currently employed in graphic arts field. Explores state-of-the-art
applications through research, experimentation, discussion and
demonstration. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
GRA 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN GRAPHICS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including a minimum grade of C in either GRA 2143 or
GRA 2182; and Program Director’s approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Health, Health and Fitness, and
Physical Education
HLP 1081 3 1 3
FITNESS AND WELLNESS FOR LIFE I
This course combines aerobics, strength training, and wellness
principles. The student is helped to design a personal fitness program
which includes regular workouts. Lectures are once a week and topics
covered include nutrition, stress, strength training principles, muscle
development, and weight control. (Special Fee: $20.00)
HLP 1087 (Formerly HLP 1082) 1 0 3
FITNESS AND WELLNESS FOR LIFE II
• Prerequisite: HLP 1081
This course is a continuation of the HLP 1081 maintenance component.
Students may also review and write research papers on the following
topics: wellness, cardiovascular exercise, strength conditioning, stress
management, body composition, nutrition, disease prevention, and
health promotion through exercise intervention. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $10.00)
HLP 1093 2 2 0
MEDITATION FOR STRESS MANAGEMENT
This experiential course is an introduction to the art and science of
meditation for stress management. Topics include the benefits of
meditation, meditation techniques, breath work, meditation and
health, and meditation for everyday living. This course will help
students find the type of meditation that is best for them enabling
them to establish a personal meditation practice. This course is
suitable for all students, regardless of physical limitations.
(Special Fee: $5.00)
HLP 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN HEALTH AND FITNESS
• Prerequisite: Department Approval
Selected topics in health and fitness as background and interests of
students dictate. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit,
provided different topics are explored. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
HSC 1100 3 3 0
PERSONAL HEALTH
Acquaints individual with sound principles of healthful living.
Emphasis on helping student meet physical, mental and social stresses
of daily life. Topics include nutrition, physical conditioning, mental
health, reproduction, diseases pertinent to today's lifestyle and alcohol
and drug education.
HSC 1180 2 2 0
TAI CHI
Tai Chi is a self-paced system of gentle physical exercise and
stretching. Students will learn how to perform a series of postures and
movements in a slow graceful manner to help improve overall health
and fitness. (Special Fee: $5.00)
HSC 1230C 2 1 3
METHODS OF PATIENT CARE
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Sonography
A.S. Degree
• Corequisite: SON 1000C
Introduces basic theories, skills, and techniques of quality patient care.
Includes communication, assessment skills, aseptic technique, drug
administration, emergency situations, and AIDS education. Presents
theoretical and practical knowledge to make sound clinical judgments
and carry out patient care activities. (Special Fee: $20.00)
HSC 1400 3 3 0
FIRST AID/CPR
Acquaints students with principles of first aid/CPR in daily living and
emergency procedures for cases of unexpected illness or injury.
Students may earn standard first aid and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR) certification. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 1121 2 2 0
GOLF I
Basic fundamentals pertaining to grip, stance, posture and swing. Work
with woods, irons, chipping and putting. Discussions on rules of play,
etiquette and purchase and care of equipment. Emphasizes
recreational and carry-over values of golf. (Special Fee: $25.00).
PEL 1321 2 2 0
VOLLEYBALL I
Designed for casual or intramural participants interested in improving
skills of forearm pass, set, spike, dink, block and overhand serve.
Covers rules and game strategy. (Special Fee: $10.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Graphic and Interactive Design Health, Health and Fitness, and Physcial Education
285
PEL 1341 2 2 0
TENNIS I
Designed specifically for the beginning tennis player. Body movements,
positioning, footwork and stroke techniques introduced and related to
forehand drive, backhand drive, fore and backhand volley and serve.
Practical playing experience teaches rules, etiquette and some
strategy. Equipment furnished. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 1342 2 2 0
TENNIS II
For students developing advanced skills of a good tennis player.
Introduces lob, overhead and drop shot; emphasizes advanced
development of fundamental strokes. Practical playing experience aids
in teaching strategy. Students enrolling need better-than-average
tennis form for ground strokes, volley, and serve. Playing experience
suggested. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 1441 2 2 0
RACQUETBALL I
Introduces student to fundamental skills needed to enjoy racquetball.
Basic strokes, footwork, body movement and positioning in
conjunction with court etiquette and rules. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 1621 2 2 0
BASKETBALL I
Designed for casual or intramural participants interested in improving
skills of shooting, passing and catching, dribbling and rebounding. Also
covers rules and, offensive and defensive team strategy.
(Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 2122 2 2 0
GOLF II
Review of basic fundamentals. Advanced skills and emphasis on play
and tournaments. Open to any student with department approval.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
PEL 2322 2 2 0
VOLLEYBALL II
For students with intermediate and/or advanced offensive and
defensive skills. Review of basic fundamental skills and emphasis on
advanced development of fundamental skills and strategies.
(Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 2343 2 2 0
TENNIS III
Specialized instruction with emphasis on techniques and strategy used
in competitive play. Open to any student with department approval.
(Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 2442 2 2 0
RACQUETBALL II
For students developing advanced skills of a good racquetball player.
Emphasizes advanced development of fundamental strokes and
introduces overhead, ceiling ball, z-shot. Practical playing experience
aids in teaching techniques and strategy. Open to all students with
department approval. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEL 2622 2 2 0
BASKETBALL II
For students with intermediate and/or advanced skills. Review of basic
fundamental skills and emphasis on advanced development of skills
and strategies. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEM 1121 2 2 0
YOGA
Students will learn the fundamentals of a complete yoga practice by
studying postures, breathing exercises, history, and principles of the
yoga method. This course will provide yoga skills to assist in improving
overall health and wellness. (Special Fee: $10.00)
PEM 1131 2 2 0
WEIGHT TRAINING AND CONDITIONING I
Designed to improve strength and appearance with the use of weight
training machines, rope jumping, walking, jogging, circuit training,
isotonic and isometric exercises. Emphasis is on fitness and proper
conditioning techniques. (Special Fee: $20.00)
PEM 1132 2 2 0
WEIGHT TRAINING AND CONDITIONING II
• Prerequisite: PEM 1131 or department approval
For students interested in developing advanced skills in weight
training, rope jumping, walking, jogging, circuit training, isotonic and
isometric exercises. Emphasis is on the use of advanced fitness and
conditioning activities to improve strength and maintain health.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
PEM 1171 2 0 2
DANCE AEROBICS
Program of physical fitness based on popular aerobic exercises
choreographed to music. Individual exercise programs designed for
people of all ages. (Special Fee: $5.00)
PEM 1172 2 2 0
SLIMNASTICS
Slimnastics is a program of physical fitness that is choreographed to
music. Participants will learn various floor exercises for specific
muscle groups and will focus on proper body alignment during
exercise. (Special Fee: $5.00)
PEM 1173 2 2 0
HIP HOP DANCE I
Hip Hop Dance is a form of art that allows one to express feelings and
emotions. The hip hop dance class is designed to develop the student’s
body and spatial awareness and improve coordination, balance,
flexibility, concentration, endurance and rhythm skills.
(Special Fee: $5.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Health, Health and Fitness, and Physcial Education Health, Health and Fitness, and Physcial Education
286
PEM 1174 2 2 0
HIP HOP DANCE II
• Prerequisite: PEM 1173
Students will review the fundamental hip hop dance skills and will
focus on choreography. Participants will learn proper techniques of
executing specific steps (position, timing, and style), how to memorize
dance combinations, and proper stretching techniques. The course will
improve eye-foot coordination, eye-hand coordination, agility,
concentration, balance, and flexibility. (Special Fee: $5.00)
PEM 1176 2 2 0
KICKBOXING I
A total workout that is designed to improve cardiovascular endurance,
coordination, balance, concentration, agility and muscle tone.
(Special Fee: $5.00)
PEM 1405 2 2 0
SELF-DEFENSE FOR WOMEN
Practical self-defense techniques designed for women. Techniques do
not require strength but rely on dynamics of motion. Designed to
increase awareness of danger and develop protective responses.
Develops self-confidence and self-esteem. (Special Fee: $5.00)
PEM 1441 2 2 0
KARATE I
Application and understanding of learned techniques in "Empty Hand
Way" (Karate Do). Emphasizes basic movement skills, safety
regulations, rules and basic oriental terminology related to the sport.
(Special Fee: $5.00)
PEM 2442 2 2 0
KARATE II
• Prerequisite: Department approval
For students who wish to attain skills in various forms of kata while
performing fundamentals of Karate Do in complex patterns of
simulated defensive situations. (Special Fee: $5.00)
PEN 1136 2 2 0
SCUBA TRAINING
• Prerequisites: Basic swimming ability and good health
An introduction to the proper techniques of safe scuba diving.
(Special Fee: $65.00)
PET 2622 3 3 0
CARE AND PREVENTION OF ATHLETIC INJURIES
An introduction to the prevention, identification, care and
rehabilitation of activity-related injuries. Training will include taping
techniques. (Special Fee: $25.00)
PET 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION
Selected topics in physical education as background and interests of
students dictate. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $5.00)
Health Sciences
HSC 1004 3 3 0
PROFESSIONS OF CARING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes
Introduces careers in health professions. Includes self exploration and
increased awareness of self and others. Focuses on American Health
Care Systems and skills and understanding needed to enter health
professions.
HSC 1230C 2 1 3
METHODS OF PATIENT CARE
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Sonography A.S. Degree Program
• Corequisite: SON 1000C
Introduces basic theories, skills, and techniques of quality patient care.
Includes communication, assessment skills, aseptic technique, drug
administration, emergency situations, and AIDS education. Presents
theoretical and practical knowledge to make sound clinical
judgements and carry out patient care activities. (Special Fee: $20.00)
HSC 1531 3 3 0
MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY
Study of the language of medicine. Includes construction, analysis,
spelling, application and pronunciation of medical terms and how they
relate to the structure and function of the human body. Explores the
use of medical words and abbreviations used in clinical procedures,
pathophysiology and case histories.
HSC 2151 2 2 0
PHARMACOLOGY AND CLINICAL DECISION MAKING
• Prerequisite: Admission to a health sciences program
Addresses the use of critical thinking in making clinical decisions
related to pharmacotherapy. Interventions include: administration of
medications, evaluating the effects of medications, responding to the
effects of medications, and incorporation of teaching. A general
knowledge of drug classifications is required at the start of the course.
HSC 2550 4 4 0
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: BSC 2093C or department approval
Concepts of disease and related pathology. Manifestations and etiology
of pathological conditions, their relevance to diagnosis and treatment
of diseases, trauma, systemic classifications, tissue disruptions and
healing process.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Health, Health and Fitness, and Physcial Education Health Sciences
287
HSC 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN HEALTH
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including the following recommended courses (HSC 1001,
HSC 1531, BSC 1010C or PSY 2012). The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
History
AMH 2010 3 3 0
UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877
Survey of early United States history, emphasizing political, social, and
economic developments. Examines such topics as colonization,
slavery, American Revolution, U.S. Constitution, War of 1812,
emancipation movement, Civil War and Reconstruction.
AMH 2010H 3 3 0
UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877 - HONORS
Same as AMH 2010. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
AMH 2020 3 3 0
UNITED STATES HISTORY 1877 TO PRESENT
Survey of United States history from the Gilded Age to the present,
emphasizing political, social, and economic developments. Examines
such topics as expansion, Populist and Progressive movements, Great
Depression, the World Wars, reform and dissent in the 1960's and the
Vietnam conflict.
AMH 2020H 3 3 0
UNITED STATES HISTORY 1877 TO PRESENT - HONORS
Same as AMH 2020. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
AMH 2070 3 3 0
HISTORY OF FLORIDA
Creates an understanding of and appreciation for historical evolution
of Florida. Emphasizes direct student involvement in compiling and
collecting documents, artifacts, photographs, slides, tapes, papers, etc.
EUH 2000 3 3 0
WESTERN CIVILIZATION I
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H
or IDH 1110
Survey of ancient, medieval and early modern western civilization with
emphasis on political, social and economic development. Examines the
ancient world, classical antiquity, the Middle Ages, the Renaissance,
the Reformation and the age of religious wars, the origins of the
modern state, and other topics. Gordon Rule course in which the
student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through
multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade C required if EUH 2000
is used to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
EUH 2001 3 3 0
WESTERN CIVILIZATION II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H
or IDH 1110
Survey of modern western civilization, with emphasis on
constitutionalism & absolutism, Enlightenment, 18th century
revolutions and Napoleonic era, industrialization and social unrest,
unification of Italy and Germany, world wars, the Cold War, and other
topics. Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to
demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple writing
assignments. Minimum grade C is required if EUH 2001 is used to
satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
HIS 2206 3 3 0
RECENT AND CONTEMPORARY HISTORY
Creates understanding of political, social, economic, intellectual and
ideological forces prevalent in postwar world through study and
analysis of recent and contemporary national and international
problems.
HIS 2935 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN HISTORY
For students interested in special topics and who wish to explore
further field of history through research, discussion and observation.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum 6 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
HIS 2941 1-4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN HISTORY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum of 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, 12 credits,
including one course in History. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences. Each earned credit of internship requires a minimum of
80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Health Sciences History
288
Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry
Management, Culinary Management, and
Restaurant and Food Service Management
FOS 2201 3 3 0
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION MANAGEMENT
Acquaints students with the Food and Drug Administration's Food
Code as well as the challenges and opportunities facing hospitality
managers in the area of sanitation management. It presents a systems
approach to sanitation management, utilizing the Hazard Analysis
Control PointSegment Program (HACCP), and it provides a basic understanding
of quality sanitation management
FSS 1050C 3 2 1
BAKING INGREDIENTS AND TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite or corequisite: FOS 2201
This course will focus on the range of baking ingredients in original,
modified, and prepared forms as well as the theory and operation of
large and small equipment used in bakeries and pastry shops. Students
will learn to identify and select quality grains, dairy products, baking
spices, flours, chocolates, fats, and oils used in the baking field. The
costs, advantages, disadvantages, and operational requirements of
various equipment also will be covered. (Special Fee: $50.00)
FSS 1052C 3 1 5
SPECIALTY BREADS
• Prerequisite or corequisite: FSS 1050
This course covers the principles and techniques of preparing lean
breads, multi-grain breads, sourdough, bagels and pretzels; and
holiday, seasonal, and flat breads. Special emphasis will be placed on
regional and ethnic breads; handling grains (such as soakers) for
specialty breads; mixing, shaping, and finishing specialty breads; and
learning innovative baking methods. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 1203C 3 1 5
QUANTITY FOOD PRODUCTION I
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201 and FSS 2251
Student will acquire the fundamental concepts, skills and techniques
involved in the management of resources, use of recipes, use and care
of equipment, and evaluation of food products. Special emphasis is
given to practical demonstrations in breakfast cookery, salads,
dressings, cold sauces, sandwiches, and safety and sanitation
principles. Student must successfully pass written and practical
cooking examination covering a variety of techniques and procedures.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 1240C 3 1 5
CLASSICAL CUISINE
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201, FSS 1203C, and FSS 2251
Students prepare and learn the skills and management theories
involved in classical dishes. Concentration is on the basics of classical
cuisine, such as stocks, soups, and sauces. Attention is given to the
management tasks of portion control, costing and presentation.
Special emphasis is given to classics such as emulsion sauces,
thickening agents, and sauces derived from the Mother sauces. Student
must successfully pass written and practical examination covering a
variety of techniques and procedures. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 1246C 3 1 5
BAKING AND PASTRIES I
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201 and FSS 2251
Students apply the fundamentals of baking science and pastry
preparation to produce a variety of bread products and pastries.
Special emphasis is given to the application of advanced techniques
in bakery management and the use and care of equipment normally
found in bake shops. Preparation of breads and rolls, classical cakes
and icings. Student must pass written and practical baking
examination covering a variety of techniques and procedures.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2054C 3 1 2
COOKIES, TARTS, AND FRIANDISES
• Prerequisite: FSS 1052C
An introduction to a variety of doughs, batters, fillings, and glazes with
an emphasis on the formulas and skills involved in preparing unfilled
and filled cookies, Friandises, and tarts. Topics to cover include:
methods of mixing, shaping, piping, baking, filling, finishing, storing,
pricing, and distributing products. Students will prepare sliced,
dropped, piped, rolled, and bar cookies, fruit, nut, and chocolate tarts;
a variety of petit-fours; and other one-bite items. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2055C 3 1 5
CONTEMPORARY CAKES AND DESSERTS
• Prerequisite: FSS 2061C
An examination of cakes and desserts that are assembled and
decorated with a modern approach using the latest technology and
equipment. Topics to be covered include: small cakes decorated as a
whole; cakes finished in molds or rings; and items that can be used for
cakes, desserts or individual pastries. Students will use specialized
equipment, practice new presentation methods, and focus on fresh
produce, simplicity of style, and ease of production.
(Special Fee: $120.00)
FSS 2056C 3 1 5
PASTRY TECHNIQUES
• Prerequisite: FSS 1052C
This course introduces non-yeast, laminated doughs and the
preparation of pastry products using a variety of methods: lamination,
blending, creaming, foaming, and thickening. Students will combine
these methods into new products to create savory items and frozen
desserts and will use basic finishing methods by applying glazes, filling
pastries, creating simple sauces, and presenting products for service.
The course also will cover the fundamentals of heat transfer as applied
to pastries by preparing creams, custards, souffles, butter creams,
meringues, and flavored whipped creams. Additionally, students will
create, taste, and test products and complete a research assignment.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt
289
FSS 2057C 3 1 2
INDIVIDUAL AND PRODUCTION PASTRIES
• Prerequisite: FSS 2056C
This course explores the steps for planning and conducting quantity
production for banquets and large functions. Students will learn how
to scale recipes for large volume production, calculate yield, work
brigade line as a pastry cook, and organize the preparation, storage,
and delivery of volume production for pastry buffet tables and retail
settings. The course will include products such as filled cakes, French
pastries, birthday cakes, special occasion cakes, individual plated
desserts and buffet desserts, as well as the study of basic sauces and
plate design for banquet style desserts. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2058C 3 1 2
CONFECTIONARY ART AND PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN
• Prerequisite: FSS 2056C
An introduction to preparing and decorating display pieces and
classical and contemporary wedding cakes. Topics include chocolate,
sugar, and marzipan; finishing techniques using an air brush; use of
molds and templates; and the “mise en place” of transporting and
delivering special items. Students will prepare, cost, and price threedimensional
decorations, centerpieces, cakes for special events, and
wedding cakes. The course also will cover the basic design concepts of
line, texture, shape, balance, color, scale, movement, contrast, and
unity. Students will learn the principles of two- and three-dimensional
design and the language to analyze plate presentations, decoration,
and displays on both visual and functional levels. Students also will
create stencils and molds and learn about silk screening and
airbrushing. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2059C 4 1 5
CHOCOLATES AND CONFECTIONS
• Prerequisite: FSS 2058C
This course introduces the principles involved in tempering chocolate,
creating chocolate sculptures, forming simple centerpieces, and
preparing chocolates and other confections with soft, hard, and liquid
centers. Students will learn to use both traditional and contemporary
production methods in creating confections by hand and with special
equipment. Efficient methods to increase productivity in this highlyspecialized
field will be highlighted. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2060C 4 1 5
RESTAURANT AND PRODUCTION DESSERTS
• Prerequisite: FSS 2056C
This course covers the preparation and service of hot and cold
desserts with a focus on individual desserts, “a la minute”
preparations, and numerous components within one preparation.
Students will learn station organization, timing, and service
coordination for restaurant dessert production. Products made will
include frozen desserts, ice cream, sorbet, glazes, individual plated
desserts, and desserts for functions and banquets. During the course,
students will develop a dessert menu from the perspective of variety,
costs, practicality, and how well it matches the rest of the menu.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2061C 3 1 2
BASIC AND CLASSICAL CAKES AND PASTRIES
• Prerequisite: FSS 2054C
A review of creaming, foaming, and blending techniques with an
emphasis on preparing simple to complex unfilled cakes and tortes.
Topics to be covered include comparison of classical and modern
preparations, classical cakes (such as St. Honore’, Dobosh Torte, Linzer
Torte, and Sacher); glazed, iced, molded, and cream filled cakes; tortes
and bombs. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2204C 4 2 6
QUANTITY FOOD PRODUCTION II
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201, FSS 1203C, and FSS 2251
Methods of vegetable, starch, meat, fish, and poultry cookery are
practiced, including the basic cooking techniques: sautéing, roasting,
poaching, braising and frying. Student must successfully pass written
and practical examinations covering a variety of cooking techniques.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2205C (Formerly FSS 2206C) 4 2 6
QUANTITY FOOD PRODUCTION III
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201, FSS 1203C, FSS 2204C, and FSS 2251
Through lectures and demonstrations the student will learn to identify
primal cuts of meats and poultry; how they are processed into
restaurant portion size cuts; to identify fish and seafood quality; cooler
management; and butchery techniques. Speed scratch will be reviewed
and practiced. Hot food preparations will be practiced. Student must
successfully pass written and practical examinations covering a variety
of cooking techniques. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2242C 3 1 5
INTERNATIONAL AND REGIONAL FOODS
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201, FSS 1203C, FSS 1246C, and FSS 2251
Emphasis is placed on learning to use various condiments and
seasonings that are indigenous to different parts of the world in food
preparation. Topics may include Far East cuisine, Middle Eastern,
Mediterranean, North African cuisine, Continental cuisine. Lectures,
demonstrations and preparations will also cover American regional
cooking. Student must successfully pass written and practical
examinations covering a variety of cooking techniques.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2247C 3 1 5
BAKING AND PASTRIES II
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201, FSS 1246C, and FSS 2251
The student will apply advanced techniques in the baking science and
be able to demonstrate production management procedures in the
pastry department. Students will prepare a variety of pies, tarts, and
meringues. Modern trend desserts, such as low-fat desserts will be
produced. Student must successfully pass written and practical
examinations covering a variety of cooking techniques.
(Special Fee: $150.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt
290
FSS 2248C 3 1 5
GARDE-MANGER
• Prerequisites: FOS 2201, FSS 1203C, FSS 1246C, FSS 2247C, and
FSS 2251
This course introduces three main focuses of the cold kitchen:
reception foods, à la carte appetizers, and grand-buffet arrangements.
Students learn to prepare canapés, hot and cold hors d'oeuvres,
appetizers, pâtés, galantines, terrines, and salads. Curing and smoking
techniques for seafood and poultry items are practiced. Modern
decorating and food arranging techniques for practical and show
purposes are emphasized. Students learn techniques on how to
sculpture centerpieces using various mediums. Ice carving techniques
are discussed. (Special Fee: $150.00)
FSS 2251 3 3 0
FOOD AND BEVERAGE MANAGEMENT
An application of principles in commercial and institutional food and
beverage facilities including marketing, menu development, effective
cost control in purchasing, pricing, labor and service techniques.
Procedures, approaches and techniques of management are explored
and developed as they relate to commercial and institutional food and
beverage facilities.
FSS 2284C 3 2 2
CATERING AND BANQUET MANAGEMENT
Students will be taught the logistics of preparation, production,
transportation, and implementation of the catered event, including
analysis of typical banquet/event contracts. Students learn to
determine cost of the project, including rental and transportation.
Emphasis is given to menu planning for various types of banquets,
theme buffets, and physical management of floor lay-out and table setup.
Training techniques for supervisors in dining room and banquet
service is practiced. Development of stewarding and production
checklists is practiced.
FSS 2500 3 3 0
FOOD AND BEVERAGE COST CONTROL
Emphasis given to methods of menu pricing, systems of controlling
and accounting for food and beverage costs, and methods of
controlling sales income through both electronic spreadsheets and
manual systems.
FSS 2942 1-3 variable
INTERNSHIP IN CULINARY MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including FOS 2201 and FSS 1203C and FSS 1240C. The
Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
FSS 2943 1 - 3 variable
INTERNSHIP IN BAKING AND PASTRY MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including FSS 2056C. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 3 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
FSS 2950C 1 1 5
CULINARY COMPETITION
• Prerequisite: Department approval
This class will introduce the student to the Junior Culinary
Competition. Students will practice many skills learned in the culinary
and baking-pastry classes. Included in this class are the development
of advanced knife skills, teamwork, kitchen organization, menu
development, and French classical cuisine following the Escoffier
guide. The students will also practice the timing elements for cooking
and service of the food, taste the texture and flavors of all food being
prepared, practice sanitation, and learn how to organize work station
in the kitchen. Students will compile a portfolio, and will need a
camera for that purpose. May be repeated for a maximum of 2 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $150.00)
HFT 1000 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM INDUSTRY
Introduction to many facets of hotel-motel and food services
industries. Includes study of history, scope and innovations in industry
as well as orientation visits to local establishments.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt
291
HFT 1300 3 3 0
MANAGING HOUSEKEEPING OPERATIONS
Systematic approach to managing housekeeping operations in
hospitality industry. Emphasis on role of housekeeping department
and understanding managerial skills necessary to efficiently operate
department.
HFT 1410 3 3 0
FRONT OFFICE MANAGEMENT
This course is designed to acquaint the student with Front Office
Management. The course encompasses theory plus classroom
computerized property management system exercises and simulations
including reservations, arrival and departure of guests, night audit
reports and procedures, yield management, and exception handling
and reporting.
HFT 1820 3 3 0
FOOD AND BEVERAGE PURCHASING
Provides a basic study of information on purchasing food and
beverages. Students will learn to create estimates of needed materials,
safety and sanitation standards development, and food receiving and
storage techniques.
HFT 2210 3 3 0
HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT
Relates managerial functions to hospitality industry and trains student
to become effective manager by applying management theories. Much
emphasis on human relations and how to work efficiently with peers,
superiors and subordinates.
HFT 2223 3 3 0
HUMAN RELATIONS AND SUPERVISORY DEVELOPMENT
Provides basic skills and knowledge of supervision with specific
examples in the hospitality industry. It details the characteristics and
responsibilities of an efficient and effective supervisor with emphasis
placed on such management skills as solving problems, motivating
employees and improving employee performance.
HFT 2500 3 3 0
MARKETING AND SALES IN THE HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY
Students develop actual marketing campaign for business within
hospitality industry. Emphasis on (a) analysis of market, competition
and product, (b) planning financial budget and (c) developing shortterm
and long-range strategies to achieve desired profit through
effective advertising, sales and public relations plan.
HFT 2600 3 3 0
HOSPITALITY LAW
Provides awareness of rights and responsibilities that law grants to
or imposes upon a hotelkeeper, and illustrates possible consequences
of failure to satisfy legal obligations. Specific attention to innkeeperguest
relationship, contracts, torts, civil and property rights and
insurable risks.
HFT 2630 4 4 0
SECURITY ISSUES IN THE HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY
This course explores hospitality security issues and crime prevention.
Students will learn how to create and implement lodging and
restaurant security programs that reduce and deter criminal activity.
Special emphasis is placed on case studies that cover a wide range of
security topics.
HFT 2750C 4 3 1
CONVENTION MANAGEMENT AND SERVICE
Defines scope and segmentation of convention and group business
market, describes marketing and sales strategies to attract markets
with specific needs, and explains techniques to meet sales goals as
part of meeting and convention services. Introduction to HOTS (Hotel
Operations Training Simulation), a computer-based management tool
that simulates the management of a service business.
HFT 2867 3 3 0
WINE ESSENTIALS
• Prerequisites: HFT 1000, FSS 2251, and department approval
A survey of the renowned old and new world wine regions, their
evolution in western culture, and their role in contemporary society.
Grape varieties and celebrated vineyards, classification systems,
international trends in wine consumption and restaurant marketing,
along with the influence of media on wine consumption will be
studied. Hospitality and Culinary students will be given preference in
enrolling in this course. Must be at least 18 years of age at the time of
enrollment. Professional wine tasting protocol requires that all
students taste the wine and spit. (Special Fee: $50.00);
HFT 2840 1 1 0
TABLE SERVICE ETIQUETTE
Students learn acceptable procedures in serving foods, including
display techniques. Special emphasis is given to learning to evaluate
food service operation.
HFT 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN HOSPITALITY MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: Department approval
For students interested in discussion, exploration and observation of
special topics in lodging, restaurant, tourism, attractions and food
management. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum
of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt
292
HFT 2941 1-4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including HFT 1000. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
HFT 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN HOSPITALITY AND TOURISM
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including HFT 1000 and either HFT 1410 or FSS 2251. The
Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
HFT 2943 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN RESTAURANT AND FOOD SERVICE MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including HFT 1000. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
HUN 1004 3 3 0
HEALTHY CUISINE/NUTRITION
Students acquire basic knowledge about nutrients, the nutritional
value of food, dietary requirements and contemporary nutritional
issues in health and diet. Rationale for dietary modifications, menu
design and alteration, ingredient and food selection are emphasized.
OST 1746 2 2 0
FOOD SERVICE COMPUTER APPLICATIONS
Students will be introduced to the computer with a concentration on
basic word processing and spreadsheet applications. Menu creation
and inventory value spreadsheets will be included.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
Humanities
HUM 1020 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO HUMANITIES
Basic introduction to humanities. Focuses on central concepts,
historical development and fundamental nature of philosophy,
architecture, music, religion and art. Concepts from such disciplines
integrated with contemporary American culture.
HUM 1020H 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO HUMANITIES - HONORS
Same as HUM 1020. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
HUM 2220 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - GREEK AND ROMAN
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Integrated examination of dominant ideas in Western culture as
expressed in art, literature, music, philosophy and religion. Covers
period from Trojan War through Roman era, emphasizing development
and influence of classical ideas. Gordon Rule course in which the
student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through
multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if used
to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
HUM 2220H 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - GREEK AND ROMAN - HONORS
Same as HUM 2220. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
HUM 2223 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - LATE ROMAN AND MEDIEVAL
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Integrated examination of dominant ideas in Western culture
expressed in art, literature, music, philosophy and religion. Covers
period from late Roman Empire through Middle Ages, emphasizing
development and historical influence of Christianity. Gordon Rule
course in which the student is required to demonstrate college-level
writing skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of
C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
HUM 2223H 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - LATE ROMAN AND MEDIEVAL - HONORS
Same as HUM 2223. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Mgmt, Culinary Mgmt, and Restaurant and Food Service Mgmt Humanities
293
HUM 2232 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - RENAISSANCE AND BAROQUE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Integrated examination of dominant ideas in Western culture
expressed in art, literature, music, philosophy and religion. Covers
period from Renaissance through Baroque era, emphasizing synthesis
of classical and Christian elements. Gordon Rule course in which the
student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through
multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if used
to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
HUM 2232H 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - RENAISSANCE AND BAROQUE - HONORS
Same as HUM 2232. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
HUM 2234 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - ENLIGHTENMENT AND ROMANTICISM
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Integrated examination of dominant ideas in Western culture
expressed in art, literature, music, philosophy and religion. Covers
period from Enlightenment through 19th century, emphasizing
emergence of rationalism and modern science and Romantic rebellion.
Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to demonstrate
college-level writing skills through multiple writing assignments.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule
requirement.
HUM 2234H 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - ENLIGHTENMENT AND ROMANTICISM - HONORS
Same as HUM 2234. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
HUM 2250 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - TWENTIETH CENTURY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Integrated examination of dominant ideas in Western culture
expressed in art, literature, music, philosophy and religion. Covers
period from turn of century to present. Focuses on creative forces
which have shaped contemporary consciousness from pioneering work
of Einstein, Picasso, Stravinsky and Wright through dominance of
objective consciousness to newly emerging guiding myths of today.
Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to demonstrate
college-level writing skills through multiple writing assignments.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule
requirement.
HUM 2250H 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - TWENTIETH CENTURY - HONORS
Same as HUM 2250. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
HUM 2310 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - MYTHOLOGY ART AND LITERATURE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Examines world mythology in comparative perspective, analyzes
myths with a variety of methods, and considers the application of
mythological ideas and symbols in the humanities. Gordon Rule course
in which the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing
skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade
of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
HUM 2310H 3 3 0
HUMANITIES - MYTHOLOGY ART AND LITERATURE- HONORS
Same as HUM 2310. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
HUM 2403 3 3 0
MIDDLE EASTERN HUMANITIES
• Prerequisite: ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110
The course covers topics such as Middle Eastern religions, philosophy,
literature, architecture, visual arts, music, and the effects of modernity
on the Middle East. Goldon Rule course in which the student is
required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple
writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Gordon Rule requirement.
HUM 2410 3 3 0
ASIAN HUMANITIES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Examines dominant ideas and arts in South and East Asian cultures
expressed in philosophy, literature, art, architecture, and music. Focus
on India, China, and Japan; covers period from earliest civilization to
present. Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to
demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple writing
assignments. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Gordon
Rule requirement.
HUM 2454 3 3 0
AFRICAN-AMERICAN HUMANITIES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or
ENC 1101H or IDH 1110
An integrated study of the New World cultures most impacted by the
African diaspora. Topics include African civilizations; the impact of
African influences on art, music, literature, dance, and religion; and
the creation of distinctive African-American cultures. Gordon Rule
course in which the student is required to demonstrate college-level
writing skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of
C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Humanities Humanities
294
HUM 2461 3 3 0
LATIN AMERICAN HUMANITIES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or
IDH 1110
An integrated study of the history, culture, art, literature and music of
Latin America. Focuses on how modern Latin American cultures are
the product of a historic biological and cultural interchange between
Europe, Africa, and the Americas. Topics include pre-Columbian
civilizations, the Encounter and its aftermath, independence and neocolonialism,
and modernist art, literature, and cinema. Gordon Rule
course in which the student is required to demonstrate college-level
writing skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of
C is required if used to satisfy Gordon Rule requirement.
HUM 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN HUMANITIES
Seminars offered for students interested in special topics in
humanities. Topics selected from special areas of art, architecture,
literature, religion, music and philosophy or combination of these
areas. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum 6 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
HUM 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN HUMANITIES
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including 6 credits in Humanities, three of which must be
a Gordon Rule writing course; and Internship Office approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Interdisciplinary Studies - Honors
IDH 1110 6 6 0
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES IN GENERAL
EDUCATION I - HONORS
• Prerequisite: Honors Program permission
Introduction to process of rational thought and how people have
organized process to define human values and physical universe.
Focuses on Greek contributions to process, compares them to modern
culture and integrates disciplines of physics, mathematics, language,
rhetoric, psychology and humanities. Gordon Rule course in which the
student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through
multiple writing assignments. Honors program permission required.
Minimum grade of C is required for successful completion and/or to
satisfy Gordon Rule and/or general education requirements.
(Equivalent to non-Gordon Rule humanities course, three credits;
and ENC 1101, Freshman Composition I, three credits.
IDH 1111 6 6 0
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES IN GENERAL
EDUCATION II - HONORS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in IDH 1110 or ENC 1101 or
Same as ENC 1101H and Honors Program permission
Examination of change in thinking process as result of scientific
revolution of 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Focuses on process itself
and impact this process has on modern culture. Integrates information
from astronomy, physics, mathematics, biology, psychology,
economics, communications and humanities. Gordon Rule course in
which the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing
skills through multiple writing assignments. Honors program
permission required. Minimum grade of C is required for successful
completion and/or to satisfy Gordon Rule and/or general education
requirements. (Equivalent to ENC 1102 Freshman Composition II, three
credits; and science non-laboratory course, three credits.)
IDH 1112 6 6 0
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES IN GENERAL
EDUCATION - HONORS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H and
Honors Program permission
Introduction to the study of the humanities, ancient history, and the
sciences from Ancient China to the Fall of Rome. Gordon Rule course
in which the student is required to demonstrate college-level writing
skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of C is
required for successful completion and/or to satisfy Gordon Rule
and/or general education requirements. (Equivalent to non-Gordon
Rule humanities course, three credits; and HUM prefix, Gordon Rule
humanities course, three credits.)
IDH 2120 6 6 0
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES IN GENERAL
EDUCATION III - HONORS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in IDH 1110 or ENC 1101 or
ENC 1101H and Honors Program permission
Examination of new cosmology which emerged in early 20th century as
result of relativity and quantum theory. Focuses on changing attitudes
toward physical world and its impact on contemporary human values.
Integrates physics, politics, mathematics, psychology, sociology,
communications and humanities. Gordon Rule course in which the
student is required to demonstrate college-level writing skills through
multiple writing assignments. Honors program permission required.
Minimum grade of C is required for successful completion and/or to
satisfy Gordon Rule and/or general education requirements.
(Equivalent to HUM prefix, Gordon Rule humanities course, three
credits; and social science course, three credits.)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Humanities Interdisciplinary Studies - Honors
295
IDH 2121 6 6 0
INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDIES IN GENERAL
EDUCATION IV - HONORS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in IDH 1110 or ENC 1101 or
ENC 1101H and Honors Program permission
Examination of new awareness of universe which resulted from new
astronomical discoveries about "time" and "space" in past 15 years.
Focuses on how discoveries are forcing re-examination of values in
light of present day knowledge. Integrates astronomy, mathematics,
biology, sociology, psychology, politics, communications and
humanities. Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to
demonstrate college-level writing skills through multiple writing
assignments. Honors program permission required. Minimum grade of
C is required for successful completion and/or to satisfy Gordon Rule
and/or general education requirements. (Equivalent to HUM prefix,
Gordon Rule humanities course, three credits; and science, nonlaboratory
course, three credits.)
IDH 2911 2 2 0
HONORS RESEARCH PROCESS
• Prerequisites: Admission to the James M. and Dayle L. Seneff
Honors College and grade of C or better in ENC1101 or ENC 1101H
or IDH 1110;
This honors course will introduce students to the process of research,
tools, concepts, and resources necessary to search, evaluate, and use
information in a variety of formats and subject disciplines. The focus
will be to analyze and utilize information critically using a broad range
of materials and interdisciplinary concepts needed for honors research
and academic/professional success.
IDH 2955 1 1 0
HONORS STUDY ABROAD
Students enrolled in this course will earn credit for participation in
approved study abroad programs in the Valencia Honors Program.
Course content will vary each year, but will involve activities that
satisfy at least one of the following program outcomes: 1) Recognize
and weigh different perspectives in primary and secondary sources; 2)
Produce original work and scholarly research; and 3) Connect learning
across academic disciplines
Internships
See Internship course descriptions within the discipline areas.
Journalism
JOU 1100 3 3 0
NEWS REPORTING
In-depth reporting with emphasis on modern news and feature stories.
Stresses elements of news: sources, structure, style, and mechanics of
production. Recommend students also enroll in college newspaper.
JOU 1400L (Formerly JOU 1420L) 1 0 3
COLLEGE NEWSPAPER
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college newspaper. Includes
reporting, editing, business, makeup, and other phases of newspaper
production.
JOU 1404L (Formerly JOU 1401L) 1 0 3
COLLEGE NEWSPAPER
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college newspaper. Includes
reporting, editing, business, makeup, and other phases of newspaper
production.
JOU 1440L 1 0 3
COLLEGE MAGAZINE
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college magazine. Staff meets
three hours per week. Writing, editing, layout, and other phases of
magazine entail activity outside regular class.
JOU 1441L 1 0 3
COLLEGE MAGAZINE
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college magazine. Staff meets
three hours per week. Writing, editing, layout, and other phases of
magazine entail activity outside regular class.
JOU 2200 (Formerly JOU 2201) 3 3 0
EDITING AND MAKEUP
Study and application of copydesk techniques: evaluation and copy
editing, correction of faulty news stories, headline writing, page layout
design, and work with wire copy. Recommend students also enroll in
College Newspaper.
JOU 2402L (Formerly JOU 2422L) 1 0 3
COLLEGE NEWSPAPER
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college newspaper. Includes
reporting, editing, business, makeup, and other phases of newspaper
production.
JOU 2403L (Formerly JOU 2423L) 1 0 3
COLLEGE NEWSPAPER
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college newspaper. Includes
reporting, editing, business, makeup, and other phases of newspaper
production.
JOU 2442L 1 0 3
COLLEGE MAGAZINE
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college magazine. Staff meets
three hours per week. Writing, editing, layout, and other phases of
magazine entail activity outside regular class.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Interdisciplinary Studies - Honors Journalism
296
JOU 2443L 1 0 3
COLLEGE MAGAZINE
• Prerequisite or corequisite: JOU 1100 or JOU 2200
Laboratory course for production of college magazine. Staff meets
three hours per week. Writing, editing, layout, and other phases of
magazine entail activity outside regular class.
JOU 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN JOURNALISM
For students interested in research, discussion, and observation of
special topics in journalism. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each
time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MMC 1000 3 3 0
SURVEY OF MASS COMMUNICATIONS
Introduction to history, development and current practices of media of
mass communication. Presents functions of newspapers, magazines,
radio, television, and advertising in light of responsibilities to public.
MMC 2100 3 3 0
WRITING FOR MASS COMMUNICATIONS
Fundamental instruction and practice in writing for journalism,
advertising, broadcasting, and public relations. Pre-professional course
for students majoring in journalism and communications.
Landscape and Horticulture Technology
AOM 2012C 3 3 1
TYPES AND SYSTEMS OF AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS
Study of operational and management styles utilized in agricultural
(horticultural) situations. Emphasis on process of systems
development, administrative definition, product research and
development, service and maintenance, machinery and equipment
needs and application, operational analysis for purchasing,
communications, transportation, production, and marketing.
Lab experiences will include field trips to horticulture concerns
for systems analysis.
BOT 2501C 4 3 2
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
Study of vital phenomena in plants. Concerns processes and functions,
responses of plants to changes in environment, and growth and
development that result from responses. Laboratory experiences make
applications to biological concepts and to practical aspects of all
phases and areas of horticulture. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ENY 1002C (Formerly ENY 1007C) 3 3 1
PRINCIPLES OF ENTOMOLOGY
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Discussion of major plant insect pests, their characteristics,
identification, life cycles and type of injury inflicted and analysis of
various control measures including cultural, biological and chemical
methods. Includes pesticides, methods of application and precautions
in handling. (Special Fee: $21.00)
FRC 2211L 3 3 1
CITRUS CULTURE
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010
Deals with citrus production and marketing. Includes study of such
practices as propagation, planting, pruning, cultivating, fertilizing,
spraying, irrigating, harvesting, grading, storing and marketing.
Includes one-hour laboratory. (Special Fee: $21.00)
HOS 1010C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO HORTICULTURE AND LANDSCAPE
TECHNOLOGY
A study of plant science as it is applied to the horticulture industry.
A general survey is made regarding plant culture as it is utilized in all
areas of horticulture. Labs include plant productions, plant training,
and plant classification sciences. (Special Fee: $21.00)
HOS 2932 1 - 4 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN HORTICULTURE AND LANDSCAPE
TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010
Topics of interest or research in horticulture, or landscape technology.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 8 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Special fee may be required)
HOS 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN LANDSCAPE/HORTICULTURE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including BSC 1010C. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
HOS 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN LANDSCAPE/HORTICULTURE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including AOM 2012 and BOT 2501 and ORH 1510. The
Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Journalism Landscape and Horticulture Technology
297
IPM 1301C 3 3 1
PESTICIDES
Involves classification, mode of action, toxicity, mixing, registration and
safe application techniques of pesticides used in pest control industry.
IPM 2011C (Formerly PMA 2502) 4 3 2
DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES FOR PLANT PROBLEMS
Study of procedures and methodologies used by horticultural
industry, both research and commercial, to accurately identify plant
cultural problems, such as pathogenic, non-pathogenic, entomological,
and environmental. Lab experience includes field trips to private
industry labs, collecting samples and analyzing problems, and
introduction to state-of-the-art equipment used by both industry and
research facilities.
LDE 1000C (Formerly ORH 1800, ORH 1831) 3 3 1
LANDSCAPE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
• Prerequisite: ORH 1510 or department approval
Comprehensive study of design elements, design principles, culture
and technique. Includes plan preparation, evaluation, presentation and
implementation of functionally designed areas. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 1234C 4 3 2
ORNAMENTAL PLANT MAINTENANCE
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Analysis of basic principles and practices used in plant maintenance of
designed areas. Considers both preventive and normal maintenance
measures. Provides comprehensive survey of design and maintenance
problems with emphasis on institutional and public areas.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 1510C 3 3 1
ORNAMENTAL PLANT MATERIALS I
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Detailed study of temperate zone plants used in Florida landscaping.
Includes identification, growth characteristics, propagation, culture
and uses of plants. This course includes learning activity designed to
ensure competence in oral communication. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 1511C 3 3 1
ORNAMENTAL PLANT MATERIALS II
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Identification, growth characteristics, propagation, culture and use of
tropical and sub-tropical plants in Florida plantscapes.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 1873C 3 3 1
INTERIORSCAPING – DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE
• Prerequisite: ORH 1511 or department approval
Comprehensive study of design elements and principles as applied to
interior situations and conditions. Emphasis on preparation,
evaluation and implementation of functionally designed areas.
Maintenance procedures and practices discussed in detail.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2220C 4 3 2
TURF GRASS CULTURE
• Prerequisites: HOS 1010 and SOS 2102 or department approval
Detailed study of turf grass varieties and their establishment,
maintenance and renovation. Emphasis on physiology, soil-water
relationships, nutrition, pests and their control and sod production.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2230C 2 2 1
HORTICULTURAL EQUIPMENT
Operation, safety and maintenance of hydraulic tools for tree and
shrub pruning; welding equipment for facility and equipment repair;
irrigation equipment for home and commercial use; lawn and turf
equipment for construction and maintenance. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2251C 3 3 1
NURSERY OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Study of management and cultural practices. Includes laboratory work
in time-motion studies, production scheduling, marketing surveying,
nursery design, nursery visitations, nursery personnel, cost analysis,
cultural approaches, growing structures and equipment use.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2260C 3 3 1
GREENHOUSE OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010
Study of producing plants under transparency. Includes greenhouse
management; heating, cooling and humidity control; culture practices
of growing foliage and other house plants with regard to propagation,
pest control; plant acclimatization and marketing. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2262C (Formerly ORH 2261) 3 3 1
FLORI-CROP PRODUCTION AND USE
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Basic concepts of commercial greenhouse construction, maintenance
and environmental control techniques. Major emphasis on production,
management and marketing of major floral crops. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2277 (Formerly ORH 2274) 4 3 2
COMMERCIAL FOLIAGE PLANT PRODUCTION
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Comprehensive study of commercial foliage production. Major topics
of discussion: identification, classification, growing structures, culture,
production, pest control and marketing. (Special Fee: $21.00)
ORH 2281C 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO ORCHIDOLOGY
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Survey of taxonomy, morphology, ecology and culture of the orchid
family. Emphasis upon cultural aspects for Central Florida.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Landscape and Horticulture Technology Landscape and Horticulture Technology
298
ORH 2840C (Formerly ORH 2842) 4 3 2
LANDSCAPE CONSTRUCTION
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Comprehensive study of methods and practices in landscape
construction industry today. Topics include mechanics of landscaping
construction, materials selection and preparation, personnel hiring,
training and retraining, work schedules, planning, labor analysis,
pricing, bidding, and estimating.
ORH 2930 1 - 3 variable
HORTICULTURE RESEARCH AND SEMINAR
• Prerequisite: Department approval
For students wishing to become involved in primary research.
Research-seminar project conducted under strict supervision by
qualified professors. Using accepted procedural format, representative
of the agricultural research community. Research performed will be
given to Horticulture classes involved in the subject matter areas being
researched. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
PLP 2001C 4 3 2
PLANT PATHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Deals with more common and important diseases of horticultural
plants. Discusses symptoms, life history of causal organisms and
treatments of diseases. Analysis of biological, physical and chemical
approaches. (Special Fee: $21.00)
PLS 2220C 3 3 1
PLANT PROPAGATION
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Comprehensive study of methods and practices used for propagating
plant materials in industry today. Includes study and practice in
seedage, layerage, cuttage, graftage, budding and micro-propagation.
SWS2102C (Formerly SOS 2102C) 3 3 1
SOILS AND FERTILIZERS
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010 or department approval
Study of soil-water-plant relationships. Emphasis on soil properties
(soil science), soil management and soil use (economical as well as
social). Includes nursery and greenhouse soils for Florida, elemental
nutrient studies and selected research topics. (Special Fee: $21.00)
VEC 1201C 3 3 1
INTRODUCTION TO VEGETABLE GARDENING
• Prerequisite: HOS 1010
Study of fundamental principles underlying commercial production of
vegetables: seeding, fertilization, harvesting and storage.
(Special Fee: $21.00)
Latin
LAT 1120 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY LATIN I
Fundamental skills in Latin comprehension, expression, and structure.
Increasing awareness and understanding of Roman culture. A
minimum grade of C is required to pass this course if being used to
satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency Requirement.
LAT 1121 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY LATIN II
• Prerequisite: LAT 1120 or department approval
Continuation of LAT 1120. A minimum grade of C is required to pass
this course if being used to satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency
Requirement.
Library Science
LIS 1001 1 - 3 variable
COMPUTER RESEARCH
Introduction to the use of electronic library resources. Emphasis
is placed on the use of these resources to meet the informational
needs of students. The course will focus on accessing information
electronically through LINCC, electronic reference, online databases,
and the Internet. This course includes lectures, group activities, and
hands-on experience. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
LIS 2004 1 1 0
INTRODUCTION TO INTERNET RESEARCH
Provides an introduction to the Internet. Covers Internet history,
online communications, research strategies, search tools, evaluating
Internet sources and documenting Internet resources.
LIS 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN LIBRARY SCIENCE
Selected topics in library science based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 3 credits, provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Landscape and Horticulture Technology Library Science
299
LIS 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN LIBRARY SCIENCE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or a 2000 level
humanities course. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
See Radiography
Mathematics
MAC 1105 3 3 0
COLLEGE ALGEBRA
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in either MAT 0025C or MAT
1033C or appropriate score on an approved assessment
Course based on the study of functions and their role in problem
solving. Topics include graphing, the linear, quadratic, and exponential
families of functions, and inverse functions. Students will be required
to solve applied problems and communicate their findings effectively.
Technology tools will be utilized in addition to analytical methods.
Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if MAC 1105 is
used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
Credit not given for both MAC 1105 and MAC 1102 nor for MAC 1105 and
MAC 1104 nor for MAC 1105 and MAC 1132.
MAC 1105H 3 3 0
COLLEGE ALGEBRA – HONORS
Same as MAC 1105. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
MAC 1114 3 3 0
COLLEGE TRIGONOMETRY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1102 or MAC 1104 or
MAC 1105 or appropriate score on an approved assessment
Topics include a symbolical, graphical, and numerical analysis of
trigonometric functions; solutions of plane triangles and vectors.
Applications emphasizing connections with other disciplines and with
the real world will be included. Technology tools will be utilized in
addition to analytical methods. Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of
C is required if MAC 1114 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general
education requirements. Credit not given for both MAC 1114 and MAC
1132 nor for MAC 1114 and MAC 1142. nor for MAC 1114 and MAC 1147.
MAC 1140 3 3 0
PRECALCULUS ALGEBRA
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1105 or appropriate
score on an approved assessment
Algebra preparation for the calculus sequence. Topics include a
symbolical, graphical, and numerical analysis of polynomials,
exponential, logarithmic, power, and rational functions; matrices,
sequences, induction, binomial theorem and conic sections.
Applications emphasizing connections with other disciplines and with
the real world will be included. Technology tools will be utilized in
addition to analytical methods. Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of
C is required if MAC 1140 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general
education requirements. Credit not given for both MAC 1140 and MAC
1132 nor for MAC 1140 and MAC 1142 nor for MAC 1140 and MAC 1147.
MAC 1147 (Formerly MAC 1142, MAC 1132) 5 5 0
PRECALCULUS
• Prerequisite: Department approval or appropriate score on an
approved assessment
To be considered as a candidate for this accelerated course, you must
be an independent, self-motivated learner who has successfully
completed precalculus level algebra and trigonometry. This course is
preparation for the calculus sequence. Topics include a symbolical,
graphical, and numerical analysis of polynomial, exponential,
logarithmic, power, rational and trigonometric functions; matrices;
sequences: induction, binomial theorem, conic sections and the polar
coordinate system, trigonometric equations and inverse functions,
solutions of plane triangles and vectors. Applications emphasizing
connections with other disciplines and with the real world will be
included. Technology tools will be utilized in addition to analytical
methods. Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if MAC
1147 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements. Credit not given for both MAC 1147 and MAC 1114 nor for
MAC 1147 and MAC 1132 nor for MAC 1147 and MAC 1140 nor for MAC
1147 and MAC 1142.
MAC 2233 3 4 0
CALCULUS FOR BUSINESS AND SOCIAL SCIENCE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1102 or MAC 1104 or
MAC 1105 or appropriate score on an approved assessment
Introduction to calculus with applications to business and social
science. Topics include differentiation and integration of algebraic,
exponential and logarithmic functions, rates of change, curve
sketching, and applications of the derivative and integration. Gordon
Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if MAC 2233 is used to
satisfy Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
MAC 2233H 3 4 0
CALCULUS FOR BUSINESS AND SOCIAL SCIENCE – HONORS
Same as MAC 2233. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Library Science Mathematics
ti=
300
301
MAT 0022C (4, 5)
Developmental Math -
MAC 1105 (3, 3)
College Algebra
*MAC 1140 (3, 3)
Precalculus Algebra
MHF 2300 (3, 3)
Logic and Proof in
Mathematics
MAC 1147 (5, 5)
Precalculus
MAC 2311 (5, 5)
Calculus with
Analytic Geometry I
MGF 1106 (3, 3)
College Mathematics
STA 2023 (3, 3)
Statistical Methods
MAC 2233 (3, 4)
Calculus for Business and
Social Sciences
MAE 2801 (4, 4)
Elementary School Mathematics
(Not a Gordon Rule
Mathematics Course)
MAP 2302 (3, 3)
Differential Equations
MATH PATH
MAC 1147 (5, 5)
Precalculus
KEY:
Course Number Course Title
Credit hours
Contact Hours
MAS 2103 (3, 3)
Introduction to Linear Algebra
MAT 0018C (3, 4)
Developmental Math I
MAC 2313 (4, 4)
Calculus with
Analytic Geometry III
MAC 2312 (5, 5)
Calculus with
Analytic Geometry II
*MAC 1140 and MAC 1114 may be taken concurrently.
MAC 1105 and MAC 1114 will not prepare students for MAC 2311.
MAT 0028C (3, 4)
Developmental Math II
MAT 1033C (3, 4)
Intermediate Algebra College Elective Credit
Developmental Credit
Gordon Rule Math Credit
Both Required
MGF 1107 (3, 3)
Mathematics for the
Liberal Arts
MTG 2204 (3, 3)
Informal Geometry
*MAC 1114 (3, 3)
College Trigonometry
MAC 2311 5 5 0
CALCULUS WITH ANALYTIC GEOMETRY I
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in (MAC 1140 and MAC 1114)
or MAC 1147 or MAC 1142 or MAC 1132 or (MAC 1104 and MAC 1114),
or appropriate score on an approved assessment
Topics include circle and parabola, limits and continuity, derivatives of
algebraic and trigonometric forms, applications of derivatives, and
definite and indefinite integral. Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of
C is required if MAC 2311 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general
education requirements.
MAC 2311H 5 5 0
CALCULUS WITH ANALYTIC GEOMETRY I - HONORS
Same as MAC 2311. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
MAC 2312 5 5 0
CALCULUS WITH ANALYTIC GEOMETRY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2311
Topics include differentiation and integration of exponential
logarithmic transcendental functions, techniques of integration,
indeterminant forms, conic sections, and infinite series. Gordon Rule
course. Minimum grade of C is required if MAC 2312 is used to satisfy
Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
MAC 2312H 5 5 0
CALCULUS WITH ANALYTIC GEOMETRY II - HONORS
Same as MAC 2312. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
MAC 2313 4 4 0
CALCULUS WITH ANALYTIC GEOMETRY III
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2312
Topics include polar coordinates, vectors, three dimensional analytic
geometry, parametric equations, partial derivatives, multiple
integration Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if
MAC 2313 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements.
MAE 2801 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL MATHEMATICS CURRICULUM AND
INSTRUCTION
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1102 or MAC 1104 or
MAC 1105 or appropriate score on an approved assessment
Mathematics appropriate for elementary school teachers. Topics
include the six basic sets of numbers, operations with whole numbers,
integers and rational numbers, learning sequences, algorithms,
problem solving techniques, error patterns, number systems, geometry,
statistics, and graphing. Does not apply toward Gordon Rule or general
education requirements.
MAP 2302 3 3 0
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2313 or department
approval
Introduction to methods and applications of ordinary differential
equations. Topics include first order differential equations and
applications; higher order linear differential equations with
applications; Laplace transforms; introduction to numerical methods.
Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if MAP 2302 is
used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
MAS 2103 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO LINEAR ALGEBRA
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 2311
Designed to prepare students majoring in engineering, mathematics,
natural sciences or behavioral sciences which require matrix
techniques. Includes matrix algebra, determinants systems of linear
equations, eigenvectors, and special matrices. Gordon Rule course.
Minimum grade of C is required if MAS 2103 is used to satisfy Gordon
Rule and general education requirements.
MAT 0018C (Formerly MAT 0012C) 3 3 1
DEVELOPMENTAL MATH I
This is the first course in a developmental, two-course sequence
(MAT 0018C and MAT 0028C) designed to prepare students for
MAT 1033C Intermediate Algebra. This course emphasizes the
fundamental mathematical operations with applications to beginning
algebra. Significant time will be devoted to connections between
mathematics and other academic disciplines, and to applications
outside educational settings. Minimum grade of C is required for
successful completion. This course does not apply toward
mathematics requirements in general education or toward any
associate degree. (Special Fee: $42.00)
MAT 0018N (Formerly MAT 0012N) 0 0 1
INTENSIVE PRE-ALGEBRA TUTORIAL
This course is for students who successfully completed the course
work for MAT 0018C with a grade of B or higher, but failed the final exit
exam with a score of 22 or 23. Students may be eligible for this course
the semester following their first attempt in MAT 0018C. Students will
work intensively on specific math competencies assigned based on the
students’ previous performance. (Special Fee: $42.00)
MAT 0022C 4 4 1
DEVELOPMENTAL MATH COMBINED
• Prerequisite: Appropriate score on an approved assessment
This developmental course is designed to prepare students for MAT
1033C Intermediate Algebra. Topics include sets, computations with
decimals, percents, integers, operations with rational and polynomial
expressions, solving linear equations and simplifying expressions,
plane geometric figures and applications, graphing ordered pairs and
lines and determining the intercepts of lines. A minimum final course
grade of C and a departmental final are required for successful
completion of this course. This course does not apply toward
mathematics requirements in general education or toward any
associate degree. (Special Fee: $42.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Mathematics Mathematics
302
MAT 0028C (Formerly MAT 1024, MS 140, MAT0024C) 3 3 1
DEVELOPMENTAL MATH II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAT 0018C or
appropriate score on an approved assessment
This developmental course is designed to supplement the algebraic
background of students prior to taking MAT 1033C Intermediate
Algebra. Topics include sets, fundamental operations with
polynomials, linear equations and inequalities with applications,
factoring and its use in algebra, introduction to graphing of linear
equations, introduction to radicals, and use of calculators to enhance
certain concepts. A minimum final course grade of C and a
departmental final are required for successful completion of
this course. This course does not apply toward mathematics
requirements in general education or toward any associate degree.
(Special Fee: $42.00)
MAT 0028N (Formerly MAT 0024N) 0 0 1
INTENSIVE BEGINNING-ALGEBRA TUTORIAL
• Prerequisites: Completion of MAT 0022C or MAT 0028C
with a grade of I and departmental approval
This course is for students who successfully completed the course
work for MAT 0028C or MAT 0022C with a grade of B or higher, but
failed the state-mandated competency exam with a score of 22 or 23.
Students may be eligible for this course the semester following their
first attempt in MAT 0028C or MAT 0022C. Students will work
intensively on specific math competencies assigned based on the
students’ previous performance. (Special Fee: $42.00)
MAT 0029 4 4 0
DEVELOPMENTAL MATH FOR STATISTICAL UNDERSTANDING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAT 0018C or appropriate
score on an approved assessment
This course provides instruction in developmental mathematics
concepts that serve as a foundation for statistical understanding.
These mathematics concepts are presented in a context that is
relevant and meaningful to students. Technology is used to aid
computation so that time can be focused on deepening students’
conceptual understanding of the mathematics topics. Suggested
external resources for further exploration of mathematics topics and
assistance in procedural fluency are provided.
MAT 0055 1 1 0
DEVELOPMENTAL MATHEMATICS MODULE I
• Prerequisites: Score of 110-112 on PERT and department
approval
This course provides specialized instruction in developmental
mathematics concepts to prepare students for MAT 1033, Intermediate
Algebra. Topics include fundamental operations on polynomials,
linear equations and inequalities with applications, factoring and its
use in algebra, introduction to graphing linear equations, introduction
to radicals and rational expressions. Upon completion of the P.E.R.T.
diagnostic or a Mathematics division diagnostic, students will be
assigned one or two topic modules. Students must complete each
module with a grade of C. This course does not apply toward
mathematics requirements in general education or toward any
associate degree.
MAT 0056 2 2 0
DEVELOPMENTAL MATHEMATICS MODULE II
• Prerequisites: Score of 110-112 on PERT and department
approval
This course provides specialized instruction in developmental
mathematics concepts to prepare students for MAT1033 Intermediate
Algebra. Topic modules include fundamental operations on
polynomials, linear equations and inequalities with applications,
factoring and its use in algebra, introduction to graphing linear
equations, introduction to radicals and rational expressions. Upon
completion of the P.E.R.T. diagnostic or a Mathematics division
diagnostic, students will be assigned three or four major topic
modules. Students must complete each module with a grade of C or
better. This course does not apply toward mathematics requirements
in general education or toward any associate degree.
MAT 1033C (Formerly MS 141) 3 3 1
INTERMEDIATE ALGEBRA
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAT 0022C or MAT 0028C
or appropriate score on an approved assessment
This course presents algebraic skills for MAC 1105. Topics include linear
equations and inequalities in two variables and their graphs, systems
of linear equations and inequalities, introduction to functions,
factoring, algebraic fractions, rational equations, radicals and rational
exponents, complex numbers, quadratic equations, scientific notation,
applications of the above topics and the communication of
mathematics. Applications emphasizing connections with disciplines
and the real world will be included. (Special Fee: $42.00)
MAT 1905 1 - 4 variable
DIRECTED INDIVIDUAL STUDIES
Provides opportunity to develop specific individual program-related
mathematical skills and/or concepts in individualized setting. May not
be used in lieu of any mathematics course listed in catalog. Application
must be made to department office. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 4 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MAT 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN MATHEMATICS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1102 or MAC 1104 or
MAC 1105 or appropriate score on an approved assessment
Examines selected topics in mathematics based on historical,
theoretical, application or research approach. Does not apply toward
Gordon Rule or general education requirements. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different
topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Mathematics Military Science
303
MGF 1106 3 3 0
COLLEGE MATHEMATICS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAT 1033C; or MAC 1105; or
STA 2023; or satisfactory score on an approved assessment; or
department approval
Topics include systematic counting, probability, statistics, geometry,
sets, logic, and the history of mathematics. Gordon Rule course.
Minimum grade of C is required if MGF 1106 is used to satisfy Gordon
Rule and general education requirements. This course is not a
prerequisite for any other mathematics course. Credit may not be
given for both MGF 1106 and MGF 2106 nor for MGF 1106 and MGF 2202
MGF 1107 3 3 0
MATHEMATICS FOR THE LIBERAL ARTS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAT 1033C; or MAC 1105; or
STA 2023; or appropriate score on an approved assessment.
This course covers topics chosen from problem solving, numeration
and mathematical systems, financial mathematics, voting techniques
and apportionment, chaos theory, graph theory, knot theory, tilings
and polyhedra, game theory, number theory, connections to other
disciplines, and other special topics in mathematics. Gordon Rule
course. Minimum grade of C is required if course is used to satisfy
Gordon Rule and General Education Requirements.
MHF 2300 3 3 0
LOGIC AND PROOF IN MATHEMATICS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1104 or MAC 1105 or
appropriate score on an approved assessment
Topics include basic mathematical logic, methods of proof in
mathematics, application of proof to elementary mathematical
structures. For prospective major in mathematics or mathematics
education. Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if MHF
2300 is used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education
requirements.
MHF 2300H 3 3 0
LOGIC AND PROOF IN MATHEMATICS - HONORS
Same as MHF 2300. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
MTB 1304 2 3 0
MODERN COMPUTATIONAL METHODS
Open to students desiring to learn to use microcomputer or
programmable calculators as aid in solving mathematical problems.
Student gains experience solving problems using programming
techniques. Each student completes individual project using modern
computational methods to solve problem in selected field.
Recommended for pre-business, pre-science and pre-engineering
majors. Does not apply toward Gordon Rule or general education
requirements.
MTG 2204 3 3 0
INFORMAL GEOMETRY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1102 or MAC 1104 or
MAC 1105 or satisfactory score on an approved assessment or
department approval
This course covers Euclidean plane geometry and an introduction to
non-Euclidean geometries, a history of the development of geometry,
construction, proofs, theorems, definitions, polygons, circles, triangles,
similarity, congruence, and other informal geometric concepts. Gordon
Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if MTG 2204 is used to
satisfy Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
STA 2023 3 3 0
STATISTICAL METHODS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MAC 1102 or MAC 1104 or
MAC 1105 or satisfactory score on an approved assessment
An introductory statistics course covering collection, description and
interpretation of data. Topics include sampling, summarizing data
graphically and numerically, probability distributions, confidence
interval estimation, hypothesis testing, correlation and regression.
Gordon Rule course. Minimum grade of C is required if STA 2023 is
used to satisfy Gordon Rule and general education requirements.
STA 2023H 3 3 0
STATISTICAL METHODS - HONORS
Same as STA 2023. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Meteorology
MET 1010 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO METEOROLOGY
Introduction to study of atmospheric phenomena. Includes study of
atmospheric structure, heat budget, winds, air pollution, and local and
regional weather forecasting.
Military Science
MSL 1001C 2
FOUNDATIONS OF OFFICERSHIP
Examines the unique duties and responsibilities of officers,
organization and role of the Army; review skills pertaining to
fitness and communication; and analyzes Army values and expected
ethical behavior.
MSL 1002C 2
BASIC LEADERSHIP
Presents fundamental leadership concepts and doctrine, and basic
skills that underlie effective problem solving. Examines the officer
experience.
MSL 2101C 2
INDIVIDUAL LEADERSHIP STUDIES
Develops knowledge of self, self-confidence, and individual leadership
skills; develops problem solving and critical thinking skills; applies
communication, feedback, and conflict resolution skills.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Mathematics Military Science
304
MSL 2102C 2
LEADERSHIP AND TEAMWORK
Focuses on self-development guided by knowledge of self and group
processes and challenges current beliefs, knowledge, and skills.
Music
MUC 1211 2 0 0
APPLIED MUSIC COMPOSITION
• Prerequisite: Audition by music faculty
• Corequisites: Music theory, appropriate ensemble, performance
seminar, and keyboard class (excluding piano majors)
Private applied lessons for music majors in music composition.
Concurrent enrollment is required in music theory, appropriate
ensemble, performance seminar, and keyboard class (excluding piano
majors). Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit up to a
maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $120.00)
MUC 2000 2 1 2
COMPOSITION AND SONGWRITING I AND II
• Prerequisite: MUT 1011 or MUT 1121 or department
approval.
A study of the basic elements of music composition and songwriting
through analysis and student projects. Composition II is a continuation
of the study of these elements. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied. (Special Fee: $41.00)
MUL 1010 3 3 0
MUSIC APPRECIATION
General survey of music and composers, with extensive listening to
develop intelligent understanding and appreciation of world's great
music. Open to all students.
MUL 1017 3 3 0
HISTORY AND APPRECIATION OF JAZZ AND ROCK
This course introduces students to the history and appreciation of
American popular music forms, from early blues and spirituals to
contemporary rock, electronica and urban sytles, emphasizing the
contribution of the recognized masters of the different genres and styles.
MUL 1110 3 3 0
MUSIC LITERATURE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or ENC
1101H or IDH 1110
Survey of compositional and performance styles of significant
composers from Middle Ages to present. Extensive live and recorded
listening experiences. Required of all music majors. Gordon Rule
course in which the student is required to demonstrate college-level
writing skills through multiple writing assignments. Minimum grade of
C is required if MUL 1110 is used to satisfy the humanities requirement
in general education.
MUM 1620C 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO ACOUSTICS AND AUDIO
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUT 1011C or MUT 1111
An introduction to fundamental concepts of Acoustics,
Psychoacoustics, and Electroacoustics with emphasis on practical
applications in professional audio. (Special Fee: $86.00)
MUM 1662C 3 2 2
LIVE SOUND TECHNIQUES
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in TPA 2260 and TPA 1380
This course reviews the theory and practices of sound reinforcement
for the entertainment industry. It covers audio equipment, sound
systems, and sound reinforcement for live events with a hands-on,
project-focused approach. (Special Fee: $53.00)
MUM 2600C 4 3 3
SOUND RECORDING I
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in MUS 1621 or minimum
grades of C in MUT 1122 and TPA 2260
• Corequisite: MUM 2634L
This course is designed to develop recording skills through solid eartraining
for quality of sound, principles of psychoacoustics, and basic
studio techniques, including principles of analog and digital recording,
and crafting of the mix. Digidesign’s Pro Tools 101® is covered as part of
the regular curriculum in this course. Students must be prepared for
additional hours of studio work. (Special Fee: $114.00)
MUM 2606C 4 2 4
SOUND RECORDING II
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in MUM 2600C and
MUM 2634L
This course explores advanced recording studio techniques, studio
calibration, advanced mixing techniques, and principles of Mastering.
(Special Fee: $137.00)
MUM 2607C 3 2 4
SOUNDTRACK DEVELOPMENT
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUM 2600C
A project-oriented approach to the development of soundtrack for
audio visual presentations such as motion pictures, TV shows and
commercials. It covers basic principles of graphics design and
technology, basic video editing techniques, DVD authoring, Foley, ADR,
music timing, sweetening and sound replacement. (Special Fee: $92.00)
MUM 2630C 3 2 2
SOUND FOR MEDIA
An introduction to the principles of sound recording with an emphasis
on media applications. Students will work on practical projects that
will familiarize them with basic hardware and software used in
professional settings. (Special Fee: $28.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Military Science Music
305
MUM 2632 (Formerly MUM 2342, MUS 2600) 2 1 3
AUDIO SYSTEMS DESIGN AND MAINTENANCE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUM 1662
A project-oriented course designed to develop skills in the design of
audio systems to meet industry standards and sound system
maintenance. (Special Fee: $28.00)
MUM 2634L 1 0 3
THE DIGITAL AUDIO WORKSTATION
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in TPA 2260 and MUS 1621
• Corequisite: MUM 2600C
This course introduces students to sound recording and postproduction
techniques using a Digital Audio Workstation. The course
concentrates on developing beginner, intermediate, and advanced
techniques on the most current software package used in the sound
recording industry. (Special Fee: $49.00)
MUM 2640C 3 2 2
POST-PRODUCTION SOUND
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUM 2606
A project-oriented approach to sound post-production techniques.
Includes CD mastering, surround sound mixing, integration of dialog,
sound effects and music in film and video productions.
(Special Fee: $123.00)
MUM 2720 3 3 0
BUSINESS OF MUSIC
The fundamentals, guidelines and use of copyright law, contracts,
agencies and management, publishing, song writing, record production
and marketing.
MUM 2721 3 3 0
BUSINESS OF MUSIC II: ENTREPRENEURSHIP & FREELANCING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUM 2720
This course prepares students for careers as entrepreneurs and
freelancers in the music and audio business. This course stresses issues
such as budgeting, bidding, taxes, liability, laws and regulations that
prepares students to find and maintain clients for their skills.
MUM 2790L 1 0 3
MUSIC PRODUCTION
Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUM 2606
Participation by students as technicians, producers and managers in
the production of a live audio event and a music album, closely
paralleling the workings of a music production. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 2 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $155.00)
MUM 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN MUSIC PRODUCTION
For students who desire in-depth study of special topics in music
production through research, discussion, hands-on experience and
observation. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of
6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUM 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN MUSIC TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including MUM 2606. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
MUN 1120 1 1 2
SYMPHONIC BAND
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students who play
appropriate instruments
Required of all music majors who play appropriate instruments.
Laboratory training session for fundamentals of rehearsal techniques
and performance of standard concert band literature. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied.
MUN 1311 1 1 2
VOICES OF VALENCIA
A performing group established for all interested in performing choral
music. Music reading skills not required. Public performance stressed.
Open to all students without audition. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 1340 1 1 2
CONTEMPORARY ENSEMBLE
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students
Choral ensemble which performs choreographed selections from
popular Broadway musical and vocal jazz repertoire. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied.
MUN 1420 1 1 2
WOODWIND CHOIR
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to any woodwind player
Selected performing ensemble. Representative woodwind choir
literature from all styles and periods. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 1430 1 1 2
BRASS CHOIR
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to any brass player
Selected performing small ensemble. Representative brass choir
literature from all styles and periods. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Music Music
306
MUN 2002 1 1 2
EARLY MUSIC ENSEMBLE
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students
Select group performing sacred and secular styles from the Medieval,
Renaissance, and Baroque periods. This course is designed to develop
the performing skills needed for accurate and historically authentic
performances of music from these three periods. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 2003 2 1 1
VALENCIA CHORALE
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students with an expressed
interest in performing choral music in the small group setting
Choral experience and music-reading skills are desired. Literature,
movement, public performance and a great attitude are stressed.
Music majors seeking additional opportunities to perform and work
with a small choral ensemble are encouraged to join. Meets two hours
weekly; additional rehearsal may be required. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied
MUN 2004 1 1 2
COMMERCIAL MUSIC ENSEMBLE
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students
Select group performing varied literature in contemporary styles.
Designed to develop the performing skills needed by musicians in a
studio recording environment. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 2011 1 1 0
PERFORMANCE LAB
• Corequisite: Private music instruction at Valencia (MVB-MVW
courses)
Provides music majors in-depth study of performance problems,
techniques, repertoire and performance skills. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 2310 1 1 2
VALENCIA SINGERS
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students
Select performing group established for music majors and/or students
with experience in choral singing and music-reading ability. Literature
and public performance stressed. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 2410 1 1 2
STRING ENSEMBLE
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to any orchestral string player
Selected performing ensemble. Representative string literature for all
styles and periods. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MUN 2710 1 1 2
JAZZ LAB BAND
• Prerequisite: Open by audition to all students who play
appropriate instruments
Performance of varied literature in jazz, swing and rock. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot
be applied.
MUO 2001 2 4 0
OPERA AND MUSIC THEATRE WORKSHOP
This course addresses all aspects of Opera and Musical Theatre
production with a focus on music preparation, character analysis, and
performance skills. The class will culminate in a program of semistaged
and costumed operatic and musical theatre excerpts. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for credit for a maximum of 12 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $35.00)
MUS 1621 3 2 2
ACOUSTICS AND PSYCHOACOUSTICS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in MUT 1011 and TPA 2260
An introduction to the qualitative principles of acoustics, room design,
musical instruments and acoustic environments, and to the elementary
principles of sound perception. Students will undergo an evaluation of
their hearing. In addition, they will undergo training of their critical
listening skills and analytical abilities to engage in effective audio
manipulation. (Special Fee: $86.00)
MUS 2360 4 3 3
MIDI AND ELECTRONIC MUSIC I
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUT 1011 or MUT 1121
This course provides an introduction to MIDI production and
sequencing using electronic instruments and computers and stresses
harmonization, voicing, and rhythmic variations. This course includes
learning activity designed to ensure competence in the basic use of
computers. (Special Fee: $89.00)
MUS 2361 3 1 4
MIDI AND ELECTRONIC MUSIC II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in MUS 2360
This course is designed to provide students further practical study in
MIDI with particular focus on sound synthesis, sampling, remixing, and
software synthesizers, as well as special emphasis on advanced
techniques in MIDI sequencing, editing, multi-track recording,
composition and arranging, plus a broad view of electronic music and
its history. (Special Fee: $48.00)
MUS 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN MUSIC
For students who desire in-depth study of special topics in music
through research, discussion, performance and observation. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided
different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be
applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Music Music
307
MUT 1011C 4 3 3
INTRODUCTION TO MUSIC THEORY
Study of the fundamentals of music through analysis and composition,
with application to both traditional and popular styles of music.
Development of skills in dictation and sight singing. Not recommended
for Music Majors or Musicianship Specialization.
MUT 1111 3 4 0
MUSIC THEORY I
Study of the fundamentals of music through analysis and composition.
Designed for music majors. It is recommended that students take MUT
1241C concurrently with this course
MUT 1112 3 4 0
MUSIC THEORY II
• Prerequisite: MUT 1111
Continuation of MUT 1111 with emphasis on part-writing and harmonic
analysis.
MUT 1241C 1 1 1
SIGHT SINGING AND EAR TRAINING I
The development of basic skills in sight-singing and dictation.
MUT 1242C 1 1 1
SIGHT SINGING AND EAR TRAINING II
• Prerequisite: MUT 1241C
A continuation of MUT 1241C; continued development of skills in
dictation and sight singing.
MUT 2116 3 4 0
MUSIC THEORY III
• Prerequisite: MUT 1112
Continuation of MUT 1112, analyzing Western harmonic practice
through the end of the 19th century.
MUT 2117 3 4 0
MUSIC THEORY IV
• Prerequisite: MUT 2116
Continuation of MUT 2116, dealing with advanced techniques of
composition and including modern styles.
MUT 2246C 1 1 1
SIGHT SINGING AND EAR TRAINING III
• Prerequisite: MUT 1242C
A continuation of MUT 1242C; further development of skills in
dictation and sight singing.
MUT 2247C 1 1 1
SIGHT SINGING AND EAR TRAINING IV
• Prerequisite: MUT 2246C
A continuation of MUT 2246C; further development of skills in
dictation and sight singing.
MVB 10XX - MVW 10XX 2
PRE-FRESHMAN APPLIED MUSIC
Private lessons for music majors in voice, piano, and band instruments
that are designed for students needing remedial work before
acceptance at the Performance I level. Concurrent enrollment is
required in music theory, appropriate ensemble, performance seminar,
and keyboard class (excluding piano majors). Will not transfer to
upper division music major programs. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated once for credit, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $120.00)
MVB 12XX - MVW 12XX 1
SECONDARY APPLIED MUSIC I AND II
Private lessons for music majors in voice, piano, and band instruments.
Concurrent enrollment is required in music theory, appropriate
ensemble, and keyboard class (excluding piano majors). Multiple
credit course. May be repeated once for credit, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $60.00)
MVB 13XX - MVW 13XX 2
PERFORMANCE I AND II
• Prerequisite: Audition by appropriate faculty
Private lessons for music majors in voice, piano, and band instruments.
Concurrent enrollment is required in music theory, appropriate
ensemble, performance seminar, and keyboard class (excluding piano
majors). Additional requirements: satisfactory performance in one
recital and satisfactory performance before a jury of faculty. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated once for credit, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $129.00)
MVB 22XX - MVW 22XX 1
SECONDARY APPLIED MUSIC III AND IV
Private lessons for music majors in voice, piano, and band instruments.
Concurrent enrollment is required in music theory, appropriate
ensemble, and keyboard class (excluding piano majors). Multiple
credit course. May be repeated once for credit, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $60.00)
MVB 23XX - MVW 23XX 2
PERFORMANCE III AND IV
• Prerequisite: Successful completion of Performance I and II
Private lessons for sophomore music majors in voice, piano, and band
instruments. Concurrent enrollment is required in music theory,
appropriate ensemble, performance seminar, and keyboard class
(excluding piano majors). Additional requirements: satisfactory
performance in one recital and satisfactory performance before a jury
of faculty. Multiple credit course. May be repeated once for credit, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $120.00)
MVK 1111C 1 1 1
PIANO CLASS FOR MUSIC MAJORS I
Elementary course in piano designed to prepare non-keyboard music
majors for minimum proficiency requirements in music major
programs. Involves major and minor scales, chord progressions, sightreading
and transposition. Open to non-music majors by department
approval. (Special Fee: $14.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Music Music
308
MVK 1112C 1 1 1
PIANO CLASS FOR MUSIC MAJORS II
• Prerequisite: MVK 1111C
Continuation of MVK 1111C. Elementary course in piano designed to
prepare non-keyboard music majors for minimum proficiency
requirements in music major programs.
MVK 1121C 1 1 1
PIANO CLASS FOR MUSIC MAJORS III
• Prerequisite: MVK 1112C
Continuation of MVK 1112C, with emphasis placed on improvisation,
harmonization of melodies, and elementary score reading.
MVK 1122C 1 1 1
PIANO CLASS FOR MUSIC MAJORS IV
• Prerequisite: MVK 1121C
Continuation of MVK 1121C, with particular attention placed on
transposition, score reading, and melody harmonization.
MVK 1811 1 1 1
PIANO CLASS I AND II
Group instruction on electronic pianos for students with little or no
experience in reading music or playing piano. Not recommended for
music majors, who should register for MVK 1111. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 2 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $14.00)
MVS 1816 1 1 1
GUITAR CLASS
Group instruction for beginning guitar students. Open to all students.
Not recommended for students majoring in guitar. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 2 credits provided different
topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
MVS 1111 1 1 1
VOICE CLASS
For instrumental music majors and students with no previous vocal
study. Emphasis on breath control, diction, tone production and
development of repertoire. May be used for secondary instrument
requirements for music majors. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 2 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Nursing
To register for any of the Nursing courses, you must apply and be
accepted to the Nursing program.
NUR 1003C 8 6 6
TRANSITION INTO PROFESSIONAL NURSING
• Prerequisite: Admission to Advanced Standing Track in Nursing
A.S. Degree program
This course is designed for Licensed Practical Nurses, Paramedics,
Registered Invasive Cardiovascular Specialists, and Registered
Respiratory Therapists as the introductory nursing course in the
Advanced Standing Track. The course builds on the foundation of
knowledge that was acquired during previous health care education.
Emphasis is placed on the role of the registered nurse and individual
responsibility for role change. Critical thinking is utilized in learning
the process of clinical decision making for diverse populations with
alterations in physiological and/or psychosocial integrity. Concepts
of pharmacology, dosage calculation and safe administration of
medications will be presented. Basic skills most often used in nursing
practice will be reviewed and evaluated. Learning activities to ensure
competency in oral communication and basic use of computers are
included. (Special Fee: $144.00)
NUR 1021C 10 6 12
NURSING I
• Prerequisite: Admission to Generic Track in Nursing A.S. Degree
Program
Builds the nursing theory base necessary for the registered nurse to
communicate effectively, make clinical decisions, and provide a safe
and effective environment related to clients’ physiological and
psychosocial integrity. This course includes learning activities
designed to develop oral communication skills and also basic use of
computers. A grade of “satisfactory” in the clinical/lab is required.
(Special Fee: $170.00)
NUR 1032C 9 5 12
NURSING II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 1021C
Focuses on the human responses to the specific alterations in
physiological and psychosocial integrity. Begins clinical application of
the decision-making process. Demonstrates the use of a safe, effective
environment that promotes and maintains health for specific health
alterations that occur in adults. This course includes learning activities
that demonstrate increasing competence in oral communication and
computer use. Relates professional behaviors and effective
communication to specific health care environments. A grade of
“satisfactory” in the clinical/lab is required. (Special Fee: $152.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Music Nursing
309
NUR 1401C 9 5 12
NURSING III
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 1032C
Utilizes the theoretical base of human responses to alterations in
physiological and psychosocial integrity. Adapts clinical decision
making to the childbearing family, childrearing family, and women’s
health. Applies the processes involved in making clinical decisions.
Provides reinforcement of the theory of a safe, effective care
environment that promotes and maintains health for specific
alterations in this population. Demonstrates increasing skill in use
of communication theory and use of computer-driven technology in
the clinical and classroom setting. A grade of “satisfactory” in the
clinical/lab is required. (Special Fee: $176.00)
NUR 2204C 9 5 12
NURSING IV
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 1401C
Analyzes human responses to specific alterations in physiological and
psychosocial integrity. Applies the complex processes involved in
making clinical decisions. Provides reinforcement of the theory of a
safe, effective care environment that promotes and maintains health
for complex alterations in adults. Enhances skill in use of
communication theory and use of computer-driven technology in the
clinical and classroom setting. A grade of “satisfactory” in the
clinical/lab is required. (Special Fee: $170.00)
NUR 2211C 9 5 12
ADULT HEALTH NURSING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 2313C
Builds on Advanced Standing Track students’ previous knowledge.
Applies knowledge of adult physiological and psychosocial needs to
the care of clients in acute, long-term and community settings.
Utilizing professional behaviors and effective communication skills,
the student will provide safe and effective care. Faculty will guide
students’ clinical decision-making to attain, maintain and promote
health in adult clients. (Special Fee: $182.00)
NUR 2244C 6 3 9
ADVANCED ADULT HEALTH NURSING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 2211C
Continues concepts introduced in Adult Health Nursing. Guides
students in making clinical decisions for clients with alterations in
physiological and/or psychosocial integrity. Physiological, psychosocial
and pharmacological applications stressed. Learning experiences
include interaction with clients in acute settings, psychiatric settings
and community settings. (Special Fee: $79.00)
NUR 2313C 4 2 6
MATERNAL CHILD NURSING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 1003C
Builds on Advanced Standing Track students’ previous knowledge.
Important concepts will include the role of the registered nurse in
providing family centered care to childbearing and childrearing
families. Clinical decision-making will focus on health promotion and
maintenance as well as complex and acute conditions affecting
childbearing women and children from infancy through adolescence.
Physiological and psychosocial integrity of each client is assured
through critical thinking and appropriate clinical decision-making as
guided by the clinical instructor. (Special Fee: $128.00)
NUR 2801C 6 2 12
PATIENT CARE MANAGEMENT PRACTICUM
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 2244C
This course has a major clinical focus designed to prepare the
Advanced Standing Nursing student to assume the role of manager of
patient care. Clinical decision making, collaboration skills,
interventions related to pharmacotherapy, and understanding of
professional responsibility within the health care system will be
emphasized. With the guidance of faculty or an RN preceptor, the
student will demonstrate his/her ability to independently perform the
role of the new associate degree graduate in a variety of clinical
settings. Learning activities will ensure competence in oral
communication and basic use of computers. (Special Fee: $114.00)
NUR 2823C 4 1 9
NURSING V
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in NUR 2204C
• Corequisite: HSC 2151
Focuses on leadership roles, management of care, coordination of care
services, and collaboration with all team members to ensure safe and
effective care for clients, families, significant others, and health care
personnel in the care environment. Demonstrates effective
communication in specific health care settings. Relates nursing
accountability to the legal, ethical, and regulatory framework. A grade
of “satisfactory” in the clinical/lab is required. (Special Fee: $112.00)
NUR 2832L 2 0 6
NURSING VI
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in both HSC 2151 and
NUR 2823C
Helps the student develop behaviors that will move him/her from the
role of student nurse to the role of registered nurse. With the guidance
of faculty and a registered nurse (R.N.) preceptor, the student will be
assisted to demonstrate his/her ability to independently perform the
Valencia Community College Nursing Program Educational outcomes.
Learning experiences will be conducted in a variety of patient care
settings. A grade of “satisfactory” in the clinical/lab is required.
(Special Fee: $69.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Nursing Office and Medical Administration
310
NUR 2930 1 - 5 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN NURSING
For students interested in obtaining additional nursing skills. Provides
clinical experience and seminar type discussion activities for student
pursuing selected topics in nursing. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 10 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $25.00)
NUR 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN NURSING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses in
reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic Purposes.
A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12 credits, including
NUR 2204C. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Nutrition
HUN 1001 3 3 0
BASICS OF PERSONAL NUTRITION
Fundamentals of nutrition, including human nutritional requirements
and role of nutrition in maintenance of good health.
HUN 2015 1 1 0
DIET THERAPY FOR HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS
• Prerequisites: HUN 1001 or departmental approval, based upon
prior completion of a college nutrition course with a minimum
grade of C
Assessment and application of nutrition within health care, focusing
on prevention and medical nutrition therapy in disease management.
HUN 2202 (Formerly HUN 2242) 3 3 0
ESSENTIALS OF NUTRITION AND DIET THERAPY
• Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses in
reading, mathematics, English and EAP; minimum grade of C in
Honors high school biology or Advanced Placement biology and
Honors high school chemistry or Advanced Placement Chemistry,
or BSC 1010C, or BSC 2093C or BSC 2094C with a minimum
grade of C.
A study of general and clinical nutrition. Focuses on nutrients and
their digestion, absorption, metabolism, transport and interactions.
Students will learn how to select a meal plan for optimum health,
nutrition throughout the life cycle and current issues, and
controversies in nutrition. The diet therapy feature is included for
students entering health-care fields
Oceanography
OCE 1001 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO OCEANOGRAPHY
Acquaints student with elementary physical, biological, chemical and
geological characteristics of world ocean system. Emphasis on Florida's
unique relationship with ocean environment.
OCE 1001H 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO OCEANOGRAPHY – HONORS
Same as OCE 1001. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Office and Medical Administration
OST 1100 3 3 0
KEYBOARDING AND DOCUMENT PROCESSING I
Students will develop touch control of the keyboard and proper
keyboarding techniques to build basic speed and accuracy. Practice
will be provided in applying basic skills to formatting e-mails, reports,
letters, memos, tables, and other personal and business
communications. For students with little or no keyboarding
experience. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1108 3 3 0
BUILDING KEYBOARDING SPEED AND ACCURACY
• Prerequisite: OST 1100 or OST 1110; or department approval
Previous keyboarding, document processing and word processing
experience strongly recommended. Computerized diagnostic tests
identify individual weaknesses at various levels of proficiency in
keyboarding. Alphabetic, numeric, and speed drills improve
keyboarding accuracy. Includes ten-key number pad. In addition,
speech recognition software will be used. This software is reshaping
writing, data input, and record keeping in medical, dental, legal and
other offices. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1110 3 3 0
KEYBOARDING AND DOCUMENT PROCESSING II
• Prerequisite: OST 1100 or department approval
Previous keyboarding, document, and word processing experience
strongly recommended. This course continues building keyboarding
speed and accuracy using a computer and word processing software. It
emphasizes production of advanced features of correspondence,
tables, reports, and forms. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1141 1 1 0
COMPUTER KEYBOARDING
Basic instruction on a computer to learn the touch system for the
alphabetic keyboard, number keyboard, and the ten-key numeric pad.
This course may not be used for credit as part of the Office
Administration A.S. Degree Program. (Special Fee: $23.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Nursing Office and Medical Administration
311
OST 1257 3 3 0
MEDICAL TERMINOLOGY FOR OFFICE
For medical office employees. Covers basic word-building system for
defining, pronouncing, spelling, and using medical words. Programmed
text and digital media on which professionals pronounce medical
words correctly allows students to develop vocabulary at own pace.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1305 1 1 0
PROOFREADING
Proofreading of original, revised or corrected documents for content
and consistency, style, format, typographical errors, capitalization,
grammar, punctuation, and spelling. Also covers proofreading of
statistical material.
OST 1320 1 1 0
TEN KEY MASTERY
Students will learn the numeric keypad by touch and develop speed
and accuracy for data entry situations as: data entry employment,
on-line, point-of-sale entries, spreadsheets, accounting, and other
numeric computer-related applications. This skill will easily transfer to
the ten-key calculator for those students for whom speed and accuracy
are necessary.
OST 1330 3 3 0
BUSINESS GRAMMAR
This course covers the basics of English grammar, punctuation, style,
and usage for business writing. Students will start from the most
fundamental frequently-used concepts and build to the more complex
concepts in business language skills.
OST 1335 3 3 0
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS
This course presents an overview of business communications,
including international considerations, and focuses on constructing,
formatting and proofreading good news, bad news, and persuasive
business messages. Preparation and formatting of proposals, business
reports and oral presentations are included. Students will proofread,
review grammar, and create an employment package consisting of
résumés, application letters and job interviewing techniques.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1355 3 3 0
RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND LEGAL IMPLICATIONS
Overview of proper records management procedures within a variety
of business enterprises. Student will learn and work with manual filing
systems and software applications. They will learn the basic legal
background requirements (such as Privacy Act and Freedom of
Information Act) for the release and safekeeping of information and
the laws and regulations regarding the management of such records.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1461 3 3 0
MEDICAL OFFICE SIMULATION
• Prerequisite: Minimum grades of C in OST 1611 and OST 2612
Provides students with classroom experience of performing realistic
administrative duties within a physician’s office. Students will work in
a simulated medical office rotating through various medical units
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1467 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO BODY SYSTEMS FOR OST
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in OST 1257 or minimum
grade of C in HSC 1531
Previous keyboarding, word processing and document processing
experience strongly recommended. This course introduces the student
to the structure and functions of the human body. Students will
explore the body systems, laboratory tests, principles of pharmacology,
routes of administration, classes of drugs, types of blood products,
immunization, the disease process, surgical techniques, and
instrumental and operative procedures. Students will learn sufficient
anatomy and physiology to work in a medical setting.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1601 3 3 0
MACHINE TRANSCRIPTION
• Prerequisite: OST 1100; or department approval
Previous keyboarding, word processing and document processing
experience strongly recommended. Emphasizes development of
competent machine transcription skills as applied to various types of
businesses and production of mailable business letters and documents.
Includes comprehensive program of basic language skills with grammar,
punctuation, spelling, proofreading and editing. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1611 3 3 0
MEDICAL TRANSCRIPTION I
• Prerequisite: OST 1467
Previous keyboarding, word processing and document processing
experience strongly recommended. This course emphasizes the
fundamentals of transcribing simple medical reports and
correspondence using transcription machines. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 1755 (Formerly OST 2315) 1 1 0
MICROSOFT WORD - INTRODUCTORY
Beginning/Intermediate word processing course. Students will learn
to process, edit, and format text and paragraphs; to use headers,
footers, sections, styles, templates, and writing tools; print and
manage files. Students also will create tables, outlines, drawing objects,
and columns. This is a Microsoft Office Specialist certification
preparation course.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Office and Medical Administration Office and Medical Administration
312
OST 2120 3 3 0
OFFICE ADMINISTRATION SIMULATION
• Prerequisites: OST 2756, OST 2813, OST 2836, OST 2854, OST 2858
Provides the student with the experience of working in a company and
performing all tasks assigned to an administrative assistant within that
firm. As an administrative assistant, the student will assist with
correspondence, meetings, client presentations, travel arrangements,
and office organization. The student will demonstrate skills in the
following: problem solving, decision making, and critical thinking.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2450 3 3 0
ICD - 9 CODING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in OST 1467; or department
approval
This course introduces students to the numeric International
Classification of Diseases (ICD) and the importance of identifying
proper codes to facilitate payment for health services. Also teaches
specific areas of ICD and how to use medical charts to identify
primary/secondary diagnoses and to code billing forms.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2452 3 3 0
ADVANCED ICD - 9 CODING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in OST 2450
Continuation of coding principles, characteristics, and conventions of
coding using the ICD-9-CM coding systems as implemented. Includes
coding principles and guidelines using the Alphabetic Index and
Tabular list for diseases and procedures. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2453 3 3 0
CPT - 4 MEDICAL CODING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in OST 2450
Teaches the importance of the relationship between ICD-9-CM codes
and CPT 4 (Current Procedural Terminology) in assuring accurate
coding and reimbursement. Also examines medical records to
determine primary and secondary procedures; teaches ICD 9-CM
codes and CPT 4 codes unique to medical specialty areas; introduces
students to RBRVS codes and their importance in billing Medicare; and
presents importance of individual payer coding requirements.
(Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2454 3 3 0
ADVANCED CPT - 4 MEDICAL CODING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in OST 2453
• Corequisites: OST 2466
This course is a continuation of basic coding principles, characteristics
and conventions of coding, using the Physicians’ Current Procedural
Terminology (CPT) coding nomenclature. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2464 3 3 0
MEDISOFT (OFFICE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE)
The Medisoft program prepares a medical office assistant to work as
an administrative assistant in a health care practice. It provides
training for input to patient information, appointment scheduling and
billing. Students also will produce various lists and reports and learn to
handle insurance claims. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2466 3 3 0
CAPSTONE SIMULATION FOR CODING
• Prerequisites: OST 2452
• Corequisite: OST 2454
This course provides a review of important coding and billing
concepts. It exposes the student to situations and tasks that will be
encountered on the job. Students will use their skills in coding and
performing medical office tasks. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2501 3 3 0
OFFICE MANAGEMENT
This course is designed for the student who plans to advance into
management. It covers current management thinking with regard to
managing office and business information systems, and supervising
staff. It continues with management principles and concepts including
organizational trends, technology and global business ethics. Case
studies are used in the understanding of groups, teams and conflict
issues. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2612 3 3 0
MEDICAL TRANSCRIPTION II
• Prerequisite: OST 1611
This is an advanced medical transcription course. Students will
transcribe physician-dictated medical documents from two or three
different specialties. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2756 (Formerly OST 2316) 3 3 0
MICROSOFT WORD
Students will learn to process, edit, format text and paragraphs, to use
headers, footers, sections, styles, templates, writing tools, print and
manage files. In addition, students will learn to use advanced
formatting features to merge documents, to create and format tables,
to work with graphics, to format macros, to work with shared
documents, and other features. This is a Microsoft Office Specialist
certification preparation course. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2794 3 3 0
INTERNET FOR OFFICE EMPLOYEES
This business-oriented course will cover all of the major access routes
for using resources on the Internet, E-mail, Telnet, Anonymous FTP, Email
group, discussion, Usenet, Archie, Gopher, WAIS, and World Wide
Web. Legal, ethical and social issues involving the use of the Internet
and Internet files will be reviewed. The focus will be on finding and
using business resources available on the Internet. Students must have
access to a computer and modem, have a service provider, and have a
Graphical User Interface for accessing the Internet and World Wide
Web. Use of calendar software will also be covered.
OST 2813 (Formerly OST 2821) 3 3 0
DESKTOP PUBLISHING
Students learn Desktop Publishing concepts and skills used by office
support personnel to create publications such as flyers, letterheads,
event programs, newsletters, business forms, and a web site. This
course utilizes Microsoft Publisher software for the Windows
environment. (Special Fee: $23.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Office and Medical Administration Paralegal Studies
313
OST 2828 1 1 0
MICROSOFT POWERPOINT (PRESENTATION SOFTWARE)
Beginning/Intermediate presentation course. Students will learn to
create, modify, customize, and deliver a PowerPoint slide presentation.
Students also will create or use drawing objects, charts, and templates;
prepare speaker notes, add sound or import from other sources, and
use delivery and navigation tools. This is a Microsoft Office Specialist
certification preparation course.
OST 2831 1 1 0
MICROSOFT WINDOWS (OPERATING SYSTEM)
Introduces the basic concepts and skills of the Windows operating
system. Students get hands-on experience as they complete integrated
activities that are designed to develop and expand skills related to the
computer and the Internet. Realistic applications using operating
system features such as the clipboard, file management/explorer, and
accessories will be included.
OST 2836 3 3 0
MICROSOFT ACCESS (DATABASE MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE)
Beginning/Intermediate/Advanced database course. Students will
learn to plan, create, modify, and organize a database. In addition,
students will use forms, chart, sort, query, and analyze database
records; create relational databases and create, customize, and modify
reports. This is a Microsoft Office Specialist certification preparation
course. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2852 (Formerly OST 2312) 1 1 0
MICROSOFT EXCEL - INTRODUCTORY
Beginning/Intermediate spreadsheet course. Students will learn to
create, format, modify, and print worksheets; draw objects; use
spreadsheet data in ranges, functions and charts. This is a Microsoft
Office Specialist certification preparation course.
OST 2854 (Formerly OST 2706) 3 3 0
MICROSOFT OFFICE (APPLICATIONS PACKAGE)
Beginning/Intermediate office application course. Students will learn
Microsoft Office in a Windows environment and its use in business
including: MS Word for creating and editing word processing
documents, MS Excel for creating spreadsheets, MS Access for creating
databases, and MS PowerPoint for creating professional slide show
presentations. This is a Microsoft Office Specialist certification
preparation course. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2858 (Formerly OST 2318) 3 3 0
MICROSOFT EXCEL
Students will learn to create, format, modify, print worksheets, draw
objects, and use spreadsheet data in ranges, functions and charts.
In addition, they will learn to apply special or custom formatting,
sort and query data from lists, audit worksheets, use macros,
templates, and multiple workbooks, and import/export data. They will
use database features; extract and filter data; and use data analysis,
pivot tables, data validation, data map, condition formatting and other
features. This is a Microsoft Office Specialist certification preparation
course. (Special Fee: $23.00)
OST 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN OFFICE ADMINISTRATION
For students interested in acquiring knowledge and skills in areas not
included in other office systems technology courses. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different
topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $34.00)
OST 2943 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN MEDICAL OFFICE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including OST 1611 or OST 2453. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/
discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
OST 2944 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN OFFICE ADMINISTRATION
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including OST 1110 and OST 2854. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/disciplinerelated
courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Paralegal Studies
PLA 1003 (Formerly PLA 2003) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO PARALEGAL PRACTICES AND ETHICS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses in
reading, English, and English for Academic Purposes
This course is designed to introduce the student to the paralegal
profession and legal ethics. The course focuses on the role of the
paralegal in the legal environment and career-related topics, including
job search criteria. The course also will provide an overview of the
legal system and selected areas of the law. (Special Fee: $56.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Office and Medical Administration Paralegal Studies
314
PLA 1104 (Formerly PLA 1105) 3 3 0
LEGAL RESEARCH AND THEORY I
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, English and English for Academic Purposes and
minimum grade of C in PLA 1003 or department approval for
non-Paralegal Studies majors
An introduction to the legal system and to the law library system.
Students learn to research and cite all primary and secondary sources
on both the state and federal levels. (Special Fee: $5.00)
PLA 1114 (Formerly PLA 1115) 3 3 0
LEGAL RESEARCH AND THEORY II
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C is required for all
prerequisites including ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110 and
ENC 1102 or ENC 1102H or IDH 1111 or ENC 1210 or OST 1335, PLA
1104, PLA 1611, PLA 2203 and PLA 2433
Study of legal analysis and legal writing. Students prepare letters,
memorandums, and memorandums of law which analyze both
statutory and case law.
PLA 1611 (Formerly PLA 1506) 3 3 0
REAL PROPERTY I
• Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, English and English for Academic Purposes
Survey of Florida real property law, including classification of interests
in real property; methods of acquiring ownership in real property;
ownership interests; surveys and land descriptions; encumbrances of
real property; easements and licenses; buying and selling real
property; deeds of conveyance; recording systems; title abstracting
and title insurance. Stresses practical application.
PLA 1730 1 1 0
COMPUTER-ASSISTED LEGAL RESEARCH
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 1104
This course is designed to enhance the student’s computer-assisted
legal research skills. Students will be able to locate and update legal
authority using online and electronic sources, and properly cite them.
(Special Fee: $19.00)
PLA 2192 3 3 0
LEGAL RESEARCH AND THEORY III CAPSTONE
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in all of the following
courses: PLA 1114, PLA 1611, PLA 2203, and PLA 2433.
This course is designed as a capstone to enhance the paralegal
competencies developed in the student’s prior course work. Through
study of legal specialty topics, students will gain additional experience
and skill in critical analysis of legal issues, locating and evaluating
appropriate legal authority and resources online, and the application
of such authority and resources to the resolution of hypothetical
factual situations. (Special Fee: $56.00)
PLA 2203 3 3 0
CIVIL LITIGATION I
(Formerly PLA 2207, LEA 2101, BUL 2653)
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, English and English for Academic Purposes
Focuses on litigation process as related to court system of Florida.
Attention to function of law, role of attorney, basic substantive law,
pleadings, discovery, trial, settlement and appeal.
PLA 2223 3 3 0
CIVIL LITIGATION II
(Formerly PLA 2206, LEA 2102, LE 102)
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 2203
Includes in-depth study of Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Florida
Appellate Rules and Florida Rules of Summary Procedure. Stresses
teaching of practical skills which enable students to assist lawyers in
commencement of lawsuit, discovery, settlement, trial, appeal and
collection of judgments.
PLA 2433 3 3 0
BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, English and English for Academic Purposes
Emphasis on primary entities under which business is conducted in
Florida: sole proprietorship, partnership and limited partnership,
limited liability companies, joint ventures and corporations. Compares
and contrasts all entities with an emphasis on practical application.
PLA 2465 3 3 0
DEBTOR-CREDITOR/BANKRUPTCY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 2203
This course presents an overview of topics in debt collection practices,
post judgement debt collection and bankruptcy law.
(Special Fee: $56.00)
PLA 2601 (Formerly PLA 2606) 3 3 0
WILLS, TRUSTS AND ESTATE ADMINISTRATION I
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, English and English for Academic Purposes; Minimum
grade of C in PLA 1611
In-depth analysis of Florida Probate Code as basic substantive law
which governs wills, trusts and estate administration in Florida.
(Special Fee: $56.00)
PLA 2602 (Formerly PLA 2626) 3 3 0
WILLS, TRUSTS AND ESTATE ADMINISTRATION II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 2601
Stresses application of Florida Probate Code to process will
preparation and probate; trust preparation and administration; and
administration of estates with emphasis on teaching practical skills
which enable students to assist lawyers in wills, trusts and estate
administration work. (Special Fee: $56.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Paralegal Studies Paralegal Studies
315
PLA 2612 (Formerly PLA 2516) 3 3 0
REAL PROPERTY II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 1611
Study of real estate financing; settlements and closing; landlord/tenant
law; condominiums, cooperatives, and PUDs. Stresses practical
applications.
PLA 2732 (Formerly PLA 2793) 3 3 0
LEGAL TECHNOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 2203
This course is designed to assist students in developing analytical and
technological skills so as to enable them to logically approach the
application of computer technology to the field of law. This course
includes learning activity designed to ensure competence in the basic
use of computers. (Special Fee: $56.00)
PLA 2800 (Formerly PLA 2803) 3 3 0
FAMILY LAW
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, English, and English for Academic Purposes; a
minimum grade of C in PLA 2203
Study of elements of valid marriage, grounds for divorce, dissolution
and annulment, property rights and tax consequences; Florida law
concerning children, parental support, adoption and guardianship.
(Special Fee: $56.00)
PLA 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PARALEGAL STUDIES
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in PLA 2003 or department
approval
This course will explore a selection of emerging topics and trends in
the legal field. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $56.00)
PLA 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN PARALEGAL STUDIES
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA. Internship is
to be taken in last term of Paralegal Studies Program and
requires Program Director’s approval.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Peace Studies
PAX 1000 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO PEACE STUDIES
This elective course is a study of peace in its philosophical, religious,
literary, historical and other cultural contexts. Investigation into the
causes of violence on the global and personal levels. Emphasis on the
interdisciplinary study of peace and the peace movement in historical
and contemporary views. Application of conflict resolution, nonviolence,
and other practices necessary to become more powerful and
peaceful members of our world.
Philosophy
PHI 2010 3 3 0
PHILOSOPHY
Contemporary problems introduce major areas of philosophy:
metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics, theories of knowledge and philosophy
of religion. Students explore writings of notable philosophers, past and
present, and examine how their ideas have shed light on problems and
their relevance to modern life.
PHI 2600 3 3 0
ETHICS AND CRITICAL THINKING
Study of major theoretical principles on which claims to good life and
moral action have been based, such as hedonism, utilitarianism and
rationalism. Each theory illustrated by representative selections from
works of great philosophers from classical period to 20th century.
PHI 2604 3 3 0
MEDICAL ETHICS AND CRITICAL THINKING
Introduction to critical thinking skills taught in the context of the
examination of ethical theory. The theory and skills will be applied to
cases related to the health care field; for example, issues of patients’
rights, allocation of limited medical resources, codes of professional
ethics, etc.
Photography
PGY 1800C 3 3 3
DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY
This course is an introduction to digital photography and the
"electronic darkroom." The class will cover basic digital camera
controls, lighting, composition, and hardware for the digital darkroom.
Shooting, image editing, and desktop printing are covered. Requires
the use of a digital, manual SLR camera. Paper will be the students'
responsibility. (Special Fee: $35)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Paralegal Studies Photography
316
PGY 2231 3 3 0
NATURE PHOTOGRAPHY
Introduction to nature photography, encompassing the areas of
wildlife, landscape, and macro photography. Students will learn to
apply basic techniques of camera operation, effective use of tripods
and flash, image composition, exposure control, and motion effects to
natural subjects in outdoor settings. The course includes four field
trips to local nature preserves and parks. Students will supply their
own camera (a digital camera with moderate telephoto capability is
recommended, but not mandatory).
PGY 2401C 3 3 3
PHOTOGRAPHY I
Introduction to black and white photography with emphasis upon use
of camera, darkroom procedures of developing, printing, and study of
visual design in photography. Student must supply a camera, which
should have adjustable lens and shutter speeds, and some other
materials. (Special Fee: $43.00)
PGY 2404C (Formerly PGY 2410C) 3 3 3
PHOTOGRAPHY II
• Prerequisite: PGY 2401C
Continuation of PGY 2401C with emphasis on imagery, content and
refinement of techniques of medium. (Special Fee: $43.00)
PGY 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PHOTOGRAPHY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in photography based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for
credit for a maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Physical Education
See Health for course descriptions.
Physical Science
PSC 1020C (Formerly PSC 1101C) 4 3 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL SCIENCE
Designed to meet the general education requirements for the technical
or non-science major. Students study fundamental physical concepts
such as force and motion, thermodynamics, electromagnetics,
properties of solids and fluids, propagation of sound, and behavior of
light and apply these principles to everyday life. (Special Fee: $35.00)
PSC 2930 (Formerly PSC 2121) 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PHYSICAL SCIENCE
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in physical sciences based on historical, traditional or
contemporary approach, as background and interests of students and
professor dictate. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
PSC 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN EARTH AND PHYSICAL SCIENCE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Physics
PHY 1007C 4 3 3
PHYSICS
• Prerequisite: MAC 1102 or MAC 1105 or two years of high
school algebra
One-semester course for health-related majors. Survey of topics in
physics related to health field. Applications of physics to principles of
mechanics, heat, light, sound, electricity and magnetism, and
radioactivity as they apply to health field. May not be taken for credit
subsequent to receiving grade of C or better in any higher physics
course. (Special Fee: $63.00)
PHY 1053C 4 3 3
INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS I
• Prerequisite: High school trigonometry with a minimum grade
of C or MAC 1114 or MAC 1147
Fundamental principles of mechanics, heat and sound. For students
whose requirements for baccalaureate degree include basic courses in
physics. (Special Fee: $49.00)
PHY 1054C 4 3 3
INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS II
• Prerequisite: PHY 1053C
Fundamental principles of electricity, magnetism, optics and elements
of modern physics. For students whose requirements for baccalaureate
degree include basic course in physics. (Special Fee: $51.00)
PHY 2048C 4 3 3
GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS I
• Prerequisite: MAC 2311
Fundamental principles of mechanics and thermal physics. For
physics, mathematics, chemistry, and pre-engineering majors.
(Special Fee: $50.00)
PHY 2048H 4 3 3
GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS I - HONORS
Same as PHY 2048C. In addition, course content will satisfy one
Honors Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission
required.(Special Fee: $50.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Photography Physics
317
PHY 2049C 4 3 3
GENERAL PHYSICS WITH CALCULUS II
• Prerequisites: MAC 2312 and a minimum grade of “C” in
PHY 2048C
Fundamental principles of electricity, magnetism, optics, and waves.
For physics, mathematics, chemistry, and pre-engineering majors.
(Special Fee: $56.00)
PHY 2101 3 3 0
MODERN PHYSICS
• Prerequisite: PHY 2049C
Special relativity, optical and X-ray spectra, interaction and duality of
particles and radiation, basic concepts of quantum mechanics, atomic
and molecular structures, introductory solid state and elementary
nuclear and particle physics.
PHY 2936 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PHYSICS
• Prerequisites: PHY 1053C or PHY 2048C and department
approval
For student in science who desires in-depth study of special topics in
classical and modern physics. Includes experimental topics upon
demand. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of
6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
PHY 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN PHYSICS
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including PHY 2048C and MAC 2311. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/
discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Political Science
INR 2002 3 3 0
INTERNATIONAL POLITICS
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ENC 1101 or 1101H or
IDH 1110
Analysis of world politics, focusing on the role of nation-states and
international organizations and on selected foreign policy issues.
Gordon Rule course in which the student is required to demonstrate
college-level writing skills through multiple writing assignments.
Minimum grade of C is required if INR 2002 is used to satisfy Gordon
Rule and general education requirements.
INR 2002H 3 3 0
INTERNATIONAL POLITICS - HONORS
Same as INR 2002. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
POS 2041 (Formerly POS 1041) 3 3 0
U. S. GOVERNMENT
Analysis of the organization, structure and operational dynamics of the
U.S. national government, both past and present, and an examination
of the U.S. Constitution, including principles and theories supporting
it. This course includes learning activity designed to ensure
competence in the basic use of computers.
POS 2041H (Formerly POS 1041H) 3 3 0
U. S. GOVERNMENT - HONORS
Same as POS 2041. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
POS 2112 3 3 0
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
In-depth study of state, county and municipal government with
emphasis on contemporary problems.
POS 2232 3 3 0
GOVERNMENT AND THE MEDIA
• Prerequisite: POS 2041
This course provides an in-depth study of how government and
the media coexist in a free society. This course has been designated
for students with a heightened interest in exploring politics and/or
the media.
POS 2930 1-3 1-3 0
SELECTED TOPICS IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
• Prerequisite: POS 2041 or department approval
For students interested in exploring special topics in political science
through research, discussion and observation. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
POS 2940 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN CIVIC LEADERSHIP
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.5 overall GPA and 12 credits, including a
minimum of C in POS 2041; and completion of any 2000 level
Accounting, Biology, Communications, Education,
Environmental Sciences, or Political Science or Program
Coordinator/Internship Placement Office approval
• Prerequisite or corequisite: INR 2002 or POS 2112
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4
credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Internship Fee: $10.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Physics Political Science
318
POS 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN POLITICAL SCIENCE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including POS 2041. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Polysomnography Technology
See Respiratory Care
Portuguese
POR 1120 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY PORTUGUESE I
Beginning level course for students with little or no exposure to the
language. Assists students to develop skills in understanding, speaking,
reading, and writing Portuguese, with emphasis on the former two. A
minimum grade of C is required if being used to satisfy the Foreign
Language Proficiency requirement.
POR 1121 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY PORTUGUESE II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in POR 1120 or department
approval
Continuation of POR 1120. Assists students to further their
communicative competence in Portuguese and their cultural
understanding of Portuguese-speaking countries. A minimum grade of
C is required if being used to satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency
requirement.
POR 2200 (Formerly POR 2220) 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE PORTUGUESE I
• Prerequisite: POR 1121 or equivalent, or department approval
This class will enable students to both develop and further Portuguese
language skills and cultural competence through a communicative
approach integrating grammatical concepts with chronicles, readings,
films, interviews, music and other first-hand sources.
POR 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PORTUGUESE
Seminars for students interested in exploring special topics in
Portuguese. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of
6 credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
Psychological Sciences
CLP 1001 (Formerly CLP 1002) 3 3 0
PSYCHOLOGY OF ADJUSTMENT
Biology and learned factors involved in processes of personal and
social adjustment and study of mental health principles and their
application to human adjustment.
CLP 2140 3 3 0
ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: PSY21012
Psychological abnormality discussed with reference to symptom
patterns, causation and treatment approaches.
DEP 1302 3 3 0
PSYCHOLOGY OF ADOLESCENCE
Study of adolescent development from a multi-disciplinary viewpoint.
Emphasizes social, physical and emotional development; adolescent
problems including delinquency and drugs; learning problems and
factors affecting life and vocational/career choices.
DEP 2004 3 3 0
DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: PSY 2012
Designed to survey theory and research on development from
conception through death. Emphasizes biological and social variables
which influence human behavior.
DEP 2004H 3 3 0
DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY - HONORS
Same as DEP 2004. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
DEP 2402 3 3 0
ADULT DEVELOPMENT AND AGING
This course is designed to give the student information on the theories
and processes of aging in our society today. The tasks of adulthood and
behavioral gerontology will be explored in order to increase the
student's awareness of issues during this developmental phase.
EDP 2002 3 3 0
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY
Study of psychological principles and how they apply to educational
process. Major areas: principles of learning, individual differences,
motivation, mental abilities, measuring outcomes of learning and
study of teaching - learning situation. Especially designed for
prospective teachers.
INP 1301 3 3 0
PSYCHOLOGY IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY
Introduction to the psychology of human behavior as applied to
business and industry. Designed to study psychological factors
involved in the work place, including leadership, motivation,
communications, morale, organizational structure, personnel selection,
training, appraisal and consumer problems.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Political Science Psychological Sciences
319
PSY 2012 (Formerly PSY 1012) 3 3 0
GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY
This course is designed to provide students with an overview of
theory and research in the major areas of psychology: biological,
experimental, developmental, social, cognitive, personality, and
clinical. This factual and conceptual foundation in psychology will
help students understand behavior and apply psychological principles
in a variety of settings and to their own lives.
PSY 2012H (Formerly PSY 1012H) 3 3 0
GENERAL PSYCHOLOGY - HONORS
Same as PSY 2012. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
PSY 2050 3 3 0
SURVEY OF FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: PSY 2012
Survey course in forensic psychology, designed to give the student the
factual foundation, history, and vocabulary used in the field of
forensics. This course provides an overview of the criminology,
forensic science, and psychological aspects of criminal behavior.
PSY 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN PSYCHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: PSY 2012
For students interested in exploring special topics in psychology
through research, discussion and observation. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic
explored each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
PSY 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN PSYCHOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including PSY 2012. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
SOP 2332 3 3 0
DRUGS AND ADDICTIONS
• Prerequisites: PSY 2012
This course examines the psychological, social, and biological issues
involved with substance abuse. Addiction affects not only the drug
user, but their family and friends as well. We explore problems
associated with abusing substances, and their impact on both the
individual and society.
SOP 2772 3 3 0
HUMAN SEXUALITY
• Prerequisite: PSY 2012 or SYG 2000
Study of sexuality with emphasis on subjects such as identity and
behavior, characteristics of sexual beings and meaning of sexuality.
Includes study of sexual health, sexual decision-making and strategies
for dealing with conception, sexually transmitted diseases and sexual
coercion and exploitation.
Public Administration
These courses are offered at Mid-Florida Tech and TECO.
FFP 1505 3 3 0
FIRE PREVENTION
This course is a survey of the principles of fire prevention and
investigation. It includes a study of fire hazards in various
occupancies; a review of fire prevention codes; a study of procedures
and techniques of fire prevention inspection, to include surveying and
mapping, recognition and elimination of fire hazards, public relations,
methods of determining the area of fire origin, fire cause, fire spread
and location and preservation of evidence.
FFP 1540 3 3 0
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS I
This course is a survey of fire protection systems and domestic water
supply. The operational feature and functional characteristics of fire
detection and suppression systems and devices will be studied.
FFP 1780 3 3 0
COMPANY OFFICER
This course is a study of the basic concepts of fire company leadership,
including the human skills, leadership tools, problem solving, and goal
achievement of a company officer. Emphasis will be placed on the role
of the officer in the setting of the fire company.
FFP 1824 1 1 0
BASIC INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
This is a study of the principles and features of an Incident Command
System (ICS), how an Incident Command System is organized, incident
facilities and their purposes (such as, but not limited to, command
post, staging area, bases, camps, and heliports-helispots), incident
resources such as strike teams, task forces and single resources, and
common responsibilities such as communications and forms in
incident management.
FFP 1825 1 1 0
INTERMEDIATE INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
This is a continuation of the study of the Incident Command System
(ICS), constructing an incident management organization for a given
incident or event, including appropriate procedures for establishing
command, transferring command, and terminating an incident,
demonstrating knowledge of efficient incident resource management
including logistics, finance, administration, and record-keeping,
demonstrating a familiarity with air operations, and demonstrating
knowledge of incident planning processes.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Psychological Sciences Public Administration
320
FFP 1832 1 1 0
EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO TERRORISM: BASIC CONCEPTS
This course is designed primarily for fire-rescue and EMS personnel,
although other emergency responders can benefit from the course. A
background in hazardous materials is helpful, but not required. The
course covers the history and categories of terrorism and terrorist
organizations in the United States and abroad, self-protection
measures to be taken at explosive and nuclear-biological-chemical
(NBC) incidents, crime scene and perimeter control procedures,
defensive tactical operations, and building an Incident Command
organization for terrorism responses.
FFP 2120 3 3 0
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION FOR THE FIRE SERVICE
This course examines the various types and methods of building
construction and their influence on fire travel and life safety. Fire
resistance of building materials and problems inherent in new
construction as well as in existing buildings are examined closely.
FFP 2510 3 3 0
FIRE CODES AND STANDARDS
This course is a study of building and life safety codes in relation to
types of occupancies, building design, fire resistance of building
materials, fire problems inherent in structures and life safety
considerations. A problem solving emphasis is used to provide
opportunities for application of building and life safety code
enforcement methods to prevent and correct building design
problems.
FFP 2521 3 3 0
BLUEPRINT READING AND PLANS REVIEW
This course is a comprehensive study of building construction
blueprints and plans. The course will teach the student how to
assimilate information contained in construction working drawings,
specifications, interpreting conventional graphic communications, and
accepted standards and conventions related to fire protection and
prevention inspections.
FFP 2740 3 3 0
FIRE SERVICE COURSE DELIVERY
This is a study of the instructor’s responsibility for communication,
learning and teaching concepts, job analysis, teaching objectives and
instructional aids use. This course is a requirement to sit for the
Florida State Fire Officer certification exam.
FFP 2810 3 3 0
FIRE FIGHTING TACTICS AND STRATEGY I
This course is a study of the basic concepts involved in fire fighting,
including the behavior, fire fighting fundamentals and principles of
extinguishment; the proper role for a utilization of various fire
companies; and pre-planning fire problems.
FFP 2811 3 3 0
FIRE FIGHTING TACTICS AND STRATEGY II
• Prerequisite: FFP 2810
This course is a study of the principles utilized on the fire ground for
maximum manpower and equipment utilization; fire ground
administration, starting with a small fire through major conflagrations.
Emphasis will be on developing thinking skills in relation to crises.
Radiography
To register for any of the Computed Tomography (CT) courses, you
must apply and be accepted to the CT program.
To register for any of the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) courses,
you must apply and be accepted to the MRI program.
To register for any of the Radiography courses, you must apply and be
accepted to the Radiography program.
To register for any upper division Radiological and Imaging Sciences
courses, you must apply and be accepted to the Bachelor’s degree
program in Radiological and Imaging Sciences.
HSA 4184 (Formerly RTE 4206) 3 3 0
LEADERSHIP IN HEALTHCARE
This course involves the study of the theories, principles and skills
needed to function in a leadership position. Emphasis is placed on the
development of competencies applicable to not only your professional
practice but also your role as a member of the community. Minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging
Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
HSA 4340 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN RESOURCES MGMT.
The course will provide students with the most common methods and
application involving the management of human resources within
health-related organizations. Topics include employee recruitment,
selection, training, evaluation, retention, and the most common
practices of each. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Public Administration Radiography
321
HSA 4702 (Formerly RTE 4914) 3 3 0
RESEARCH METHODS AND INFORMATION LITERACY
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in STA 2023 and admission
into a BS degree program in Radiologic & Imaging Sciences
Research methods and information literacy are important because the
health care profession is continually changing, which requires the
allied health professional to possess new knowledge to function
competently. The allied health professional should contribute to the
body of knowledge and be able to effectively analyze resources to
promote growth in the profession. The attitude of lifelong learning
enables the professional to stay in step with the current health care
environment and be prepared to help foster the future and increase
awareness of the profession in the global community. This content is
geared to increase and disseminate intellectual inquiry, information
literacy and the use of scholarly research methods. Minimum grade of
C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S.
degree requirement(s).
HSC 4555 3 3 0
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Admission to the B.S. degree program in
Radiologic & Imaging Sciences
A rich appreciation of the characteristics and manifestations of
diseases caused by alterations or injury to the structure or function of
the body are essential to the allied health science professional. The indepth
study of pathophysiology allows the professional to
communicate better with other health care professionals, including
physicians and scientists, as well as with the patient, for the history
and physical assessment. Minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement(s).
HSC 4640 3 3 0
HEALTH LAW AND COMPLIANCE
Health care law and compliance is important because of its financial
and emotional impact on technologists, patients, and health care
facilities. This content is geared toward legal and compliance issues
that affect the employee and employer directly regarding accreditation
and compliance issues. In addition, this content gives guidance on risk
management techniques, including reporting, that can help mitigate
noncompliance. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
HSC 4652 3 3 0
ETHICS AND HEALTH CARE IN A PLURALISTIC SOCIETY
The course is designed to provide students with an ethical framework
for decision-making in the context of a pluralistic society. Models and
principles of ethical justification among diversity of cultures and belief
systems will be analyzed. Specific applications are made to concerns
in clinical and health care management. Topics include the right to
health care, community health ethics, end-of-life issues, and
organizational ethics. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 1000 2 2 0
INTRODUCTION TO RADIOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to Radiography A.S. Degree program
• Corequisites: RTE 1111C
An overview of radiography and its role in health care delivery with
orientation to academic and administrative structure and to the
profession as a whole, including ethical and legal responsibilities,
patient consent, hospital and department policies, and basic radiation
protection principles. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 1111C 3 2 3
PATIENT CARE IN RADIOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: Acceptance to Radiography A.S. Degree program
• Corequisite: RTE 1000
Content is designed to provide the basic concepts of patient care
including consideration for physical, psychological, legal, and
ethical needs of the patient and family. Routine and emergency
patient care procedures are described, as well as infection control
procedures using standard precautions. The role of the radiographer in
patient education is identified. Basic concepts of pharmacology/drug
administration and theory and practice of venipuncture techniques
are presented. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
RTE 1418 3 2 0
PRINCIPLES OF RADIOGRAPHY I
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1000 and RTE 1111C
• Prerequisites or Corequisites: RTE 1503C and RTE 1804L
Basic principles of radiation, image receptor systems, processing and a
study of the factors that govern and influence the production and
evaluation of the radiographic image will be presented. Minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging
Sciences B.S. degree requirement. (Special Fee: $25.00)
RTE 1458 3 3 0
PRINCIPLES OF RADIOGRAPHY II
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1418 and RTE 1503C
• Corequisites: RTE 1513C and RTE 1814L
An overall survey of factors affecting the production of high quality
radiographs. Manipulation of technical factors and use of accessory
devices to produce quality radiographic images will be explored.
Quality assurance evaluation methods for radiographic systems will
be presented, performed, and orally reported. Minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S.
degree requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Radiography Radiography
322
RTE 1503C 4 3 3
RADIOGRAPHIC PROCEDURES I
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1000 and RTE 1111C
• Corequisites: RTE 1418 and RTE 1804L
A study of patient habitus, positioning, equipment manipulation, and
radiographic quality image evaluation of the chest, abdomen and
appendicular skeleton. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking and
communication skills related to procedure performance patient care
and radiation protection. Minimum grade of C is required if used to
satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
(Special Fee: $31.00)
RTE 1513C 4 3 3
RADIOGRAPHIC PROCEDURES II
• Prerequisites: A minimum grades of C in RTE 1418 and RTE 1503C
• Corequisites: RTE 1458 and RTE 1814L
A study of patient positioning, equipment manipulation and
radiographic quality evaluation of the axial skeleton. Emphasis is
placed on critical thinking and communication skills related to
procedure performance, patient care and radiation protection.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and
Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement. (Special Fee: $31.00)
RTE 1523C 4 3 3
RADIOGRAPHIC PROCEDURES III
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1513C and RTE 1458
• Corequisites: RTE 2762 and RTE 1824L
A study of patient positioning and radiographic quality image
evaluation for contrast procedures for gastrointestinal and
genitourinary systems, special studies and CT with emphasis on
equipment manipulation, to include fluoroscopy and mobile
radiography. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking and
communication skills related to patient care and radiation protection.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and
Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement. (Special Fee: $31.00)
RTE 1804L 2 0 16
RADIOGRAPHIC CLINICAL EDUCATION I
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1000 and RTE 1111C
• Corequisites: RTE 1418 and RTE 1503C
Supervised clinical experience and competency evaluation of
professional interaction and performance of routine radiographic
procedures with emphasis on radiation protection, patient care,
equipment orientation, radiographic technique, image processing
procedures and image quality evaluation. Minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement. (Special Fee: $67.00)
RTE 1814L 2 0 16
RADIOGRAPHIC CLINICAL EDUCATION II
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1804L
• Corequisites: RTE 1513C and RTE 1458
Continuation of supervised clinical experience and competency
evaluation of professional interaction and performance of routine
radiographic procedures with emphasis on radiation protection,
patient care, equipment operation, radiographic technique, image
processing procedures and image quality evaluation. Minimum grade
of C is required for all Radiography Program courses.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
RTE 1824L 2 0 16
RADIOGRAPHIC CLINICAL EDUCATION III
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1814L
• Corequisites: RTE 1523C and RTE 2762
Continuation of supervised clinical experience and competency
evaluation of professional interaction and performance of routine
radiographic procedures with emphasis on radiation protection,
patient care, equipment operation, radiographic technique, image
processing procedures and image quality evaluation. Minimum grade
of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee: $37.00)
RTE 2061 3 3 0
RADIOGRAPHIC SEMINAR
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in RTE 2563 and RTE 2782
• Corequisites: RTE 2385 and RTE 2844L
This course is designed to provide a forum for student research and
review of all aspects of radiography. Minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement.
RTE 2385 2 2 0
RADIATION BIOLOGY AND PROTECTION
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 2563
• Corequisites: RTE 2061 and RTE 2844L
Study of acute and chronic effects of ionizing radiation on biologic
systems. Investigates responses at cellular and total organism level.
Presents protection measures and regulations for all types of ionizing
radiation. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic
and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 2563 4 4 0
PRINCIPLES OF RADIOGRAPHY III
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1458
• Corequisites: RTE 2782 and RTE 2834L
A study of the physical principles and application of imaging
equipment; radiographic/fluoroscopic, computed tomography, digital
imaging, magnetic resonance imaging, and radiology department
computerization. Assignments include written journal article reports.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and
Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Radiography Radiography
323
RTE 2762 3 3 0
SECTIONAL ANATOMY
• Prerequisite: BSC 2094C
Detailed study of gross anatomical structures will be systematically
conducted for location, relationship to other structures, and function.
Identification of anatomical structures in axial (transverse), sagittal,
coronal and orthogonal (oblique) planes will be achieved using
illustrations and anatomy images comparing computed tomography,
magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound images, when applicable.
A minimum grade of C is required for all radiography and sonography
program courses.
RTE 2782 3 3 0
RADIOGRAPHIC PATHOLOGY
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1523C
• Corequisites: A minimum grades of C in RTE 2563 and RTE 2834L
Course content will provide student with an introduction to the
concept of disease. The relationship of pathology and disease to
various radiographic procedures will be discussed. Assignments will
include an oral case presentation. Minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement.
RTE 2834L 3 0 24
RADIOGRAPHIC CLINICAL EDUCATION IV
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 1824L
• Corequisites: RTE 2563 and RTE 2782
Continuation of supervised clinical experience and competency
evaluation of professional interaction and performance of routine
radiographic procedures with emphasis on radiation protection,
patient care, equipment operation, radiographic technique, image
processing procedures and image quality evaluation. Minimum grade
of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee: $20.00)
RTE 2844L 3 0 24
RADIOGRAPHIC CLINICAL EDUCATION V
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 2834L
• Corequisites: RTE 2385 and RTE 2061
Continuation of supervised clinical experience and competency
evaluation of professional interaction and performance of routine
radiographic procedures with emphasis on radiation protection,
patient care, equipment operation, radiographic technique, image
processing procedures and image quality evaluation. Minimum grade
of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S.
degree requirement. (Special Fee: $20.00)
RTE 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN RADIOGRAPHY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in radiography based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory work as part
of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. Minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement.
RTE 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN RADIOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, second
year standing in Radiography degree program; and Program
Director’s approval
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
(Internship Fee: $10.00)
RTE 3116 3 3 0
ADVANCED PATIENT CARE
As the role of the medical imaging professional continues to expand,
more knowledge is needed in all areas. Patient care is no exception.
Advanced patient care skills are essential elements of providing high
quality patient care. This course focuses on patient education,
assessment, communication, pre-procedural and post-procedural care,
and proper charting and documentation. Technologists'
responsibilities and intervention in cases of critical patient need also
will be discussed. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 3205 3 3 0
ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION
This course focuses on the administrative structures of radiology
departments. It encompasses analysis of systems, decision-making
processes, and communication techniques to interact with all levels of
management and supervision within and outside of the Radiology
department. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 3213 3 3 0
RADIOLOGY INFORMATION SYSTEMS
This course will give the imaging professional the knowledge and skills
relating to the purpose, use, maintenance, and regulations associated
with the most current radiology management, health information, and
picture archival medical systems. Minimum grade of C is required if
used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Radiography Radiography
324
RTE 3253 3 3 0
TEACHING IN THE HEALTH PROFESSIONS
This course presents an analytical and developmental approach to the
roles and functions of the health professional teacher. It focuses on
teaching roles, style and philosophy, and the application of learning
theory to instructional design and lesson planning. Emphasis is placed
on selection and application of appropriate teaching strategies,
supportive technologies, and assessment methods necessary for a
diverse student population. Student problem management and key
ethical and legal responsibilities are addressed. Minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement.
RTE 3590 (Formerly RTE 2571) 3 3 0
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Course content is designed to impart an understanding of the physical
principles and instrumentation involved in computed tomography
(CT). Content will include detailed coverage of procedure protocols for
CT imaging and a thorough coverage of common diseases diagnosable
using CT. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic
and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 3591 (Formerly RTE 2575) 3 3 0
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING I
Course content is designed to impart the basic concepts of nuclear
magnetic resonance; covers types of magnets and the generation of a
nuclear magnetic signal; includes terminology used routinely in
clinical settings, and progresses to Magnetic Resonance physics as it
applies to instrumentation and imaging. Factors impacting the
development and management of a Magnetic Resonance facility will be
presented. Content also includes basic principles of magnet safety.
A minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and
Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 3592 (Formerly RTE 2576) 3 3 0
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING II
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in RTE 3591
Course content provides a comprehensive presentation of Magnetic
Resonance Imaging procedures covering anatomy, pathology, Magnetic
Resonance tissue characteristics and equipment applications for the
central nervous system, thoracic, mediastinal, abdominal, pelvic and
musculoskeletal regions of the human body. Minimum grade of C is
required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree
requirement.
RTE 3765 3 3 0
ANATOMY FOR THE MEDICAL IMAGER
• Prerequisite: A minimum grade of C in BSC 2094C
An advanced study of normal anatomical structures to include
location, relationship to other structures, and function. Identification
of anatomical structures in multiplanar sections will be achieved using
diagrams and diagnostic images comparing Computed Tomography,
Magnetic Resonance Imaging, and Ultrasound images, when
applicable. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic & Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirements.
RTE 4208 3 3 0
MANAGED CARE CONCEPTS
It is important for the radiologic technologist to understand the various
methods of health care delivery to remain knowledgeable in the
changing face of technology. Emphasis on provider and payer sponsored
systems, methods of financing and reimbursement, and common
operational issues. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy
Radiologic and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 4474 3 3 0
QUALITY MANAGEMENT
This course involves the study of quality assurance, quality
improvement and quality control. It describes the role of the imaging
technologist in developing and implementing quality assurance
programs to ensure accurate diagnosis and safe patient care. It
includes specific quality control procedures used to evaluate
equipment operation and monitor procedure protocols. Minimum
grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and Imaging
Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 4574 3 3 0
ADVANCED IMAGING MODALITIES
The course is an introduction to the physical principles that apply to
image production through the use of high frequency x-ray and its
interface with computer technology; the use of magnetic fields and radio
frequency; the use of radiopharmaceuticals, and the use of ultrasound.
Major emphasis is on understanding the application of physics for
production of medical images through computer technology with
computed tomography, magnetic resonance, mammography,
cardiovascular/intervention, ultrasound, and nuclide imaging.
Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic and
Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
RTE 4941L 3 0 24
PRACTICUM
• Prerequisites: A minimum grade of C in specified concentration
coursework, as follows: Quality Management – RTE 4474 and
RTE 3765; or Magnetic Resonance Imaging – RTE 3591 and
RTE 3765; or Computed Tomography - RTE 3590 and RTE 3765.
Practical application in a clinical setting of knowledge acquired in the
classroom. Minimum grade of C is required if used to satisfy Radiologic
and Imaging Sciences B.S. degree requirement.
Reading
REA 0007C (Formerly REA 0001C) 3 3 2
DEVELOPMENTAL READING I
• Prerequisite: Appropriate score on PERT or other approved
assessment
Study of literal and inferential comprehension skills with emphasis on
literal skills and organization patterns of information. Includes
strategies for vocabulary development. Minimum grade of C is
required for successful completion. Upon successful completion,
degree-seeking students must take REA 0017C. REA 0007C credit does
not apply toward any associate degree. (Special Fee $29.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Radiography Reading
325
REA 0017C (Formerly REA 0002C) 3 3 2
DEVELOPMENTAL READING II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in REA 0007C or appropriate
score on PERT or other approved assessment
Review and reinforcement of skills covered in REA 0007C. Emphasis
on additional critical comprehension skills. Strategies for vocabulary
development. A minimum final course grade of C is required for
successful completion of this course. Upon successful completion, a
student has met the reading requirement for entry into ENC 1101. REA
0017C credit does not apply toward any associate degree.
(Special Fee $29.00)
REA 1105 (Formerly REA 1106) 3 3 0
COLLEGE READING
• Prerequisite: Minimum score of 104 on PERT
Reinforcement of comprehension skills and vocabulary development.
Emphasis on developing strategies for learning and remembering
new words.
REA 1205 3 3 0
READING SKILLS
• Prerequisite: REA 1105 or score of 104 on PERT or other stateapproved
entry test
Designed to assist students with average and above-average reading
ability to develop optimal reading skills. Emphasis on increasing
reading speed and flexibility; developing thorough, accurate, and
critical comprehension, and acquiring precise and extensive
vocabulary.
REA 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN READING
Seminar for students interested in research, discussion, and
observation of special topics in reading. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
REA 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN READING
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or IDH 1110 or REA 1105.
The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or
Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide
override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Real Estate
REE 1000 3 3 0
REAL ESTATE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
Study of legal and economic aspects of real estate with emphasis on
ownership, realty market, instruments of record, mortgages, taxes and
government regulations. Students interested in sitting for Florida Real
Estate Commission exam must take combined REE 1000 and REE 1400
end-of-course exam and receive grade of 70 percent or better.
REE 1400 3 3 0
FLORIDA REAL ESTATE LAW
Introduction to Florida real estate license law and rules, and
regulations of Florida Real Estate Commission. Legal and ethical
principles covered are required knowledge for student entering real
estate field and for state real estate license examination. Students
interested in sitting for the Florida Real Estate Commission exam must
take combined REE 1000 and REE 1400 end-of-course exam and
receive a grade of 70 percent or better.
REE 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN REAL ESTATE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including REE 1000 and REE 1400. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required program/
discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
REE 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN REAL ESTATE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including REE 1000 and REE 1400. The Program
Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship
Placement Office has the discretion to provide override
approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
326
Reading Real Estate
Religion
REL 2000 3 3 0
UNDERSTANDING RELIGIOUS TRADITIONS
Designed for students interested in exploring various ways people
have expressed religious views. Explores questions that lead people to
formulate religious answers and various religious doctrines that
formalize human concerns. Balances different opinions from major
religious traditions such as Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism and
Buddhism, among others, and helps students broaden perspectives
on religion.
Respiratory Care
To register for any of the Polysomnography Technology courses, you
must apply and be accepted to the Polysomnography Technology
program.
To register for any of the Respiratory Care courses, you must apply and
be accepted to the Respiratory Care program.
PSG 4000 3 3 0
POLYSOMNOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY III
• Prerequisites: A.S. degree in Respiratory Care and
admission into Cardiopulmonary Science Program and
Polysomnography Track
• Corequisites: PSG 4000L and PSG 4800L
This course introduces principles of Polysomnographic technology. Topics
covered in the course include: medical terminology, instrumentation
setup and calibration, recording and monitoring techniques, documentation,
professional issues and patient-technologist interactions related to
Polysomnographic Technology. This course is designed for advanced
practitioners in Polysomnographic Technology while exploring pediatric
and neonatal Neurodiagnostics, MSLT (multiple sleep latency test), pharmacology
and sleep disorders, including cataplexy and narcolepsy
PSG 4000L 1 0 3
POLYSOMNOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY III LABORATORY
• Prerequisite: A.S. degree in Respiratory Care and admission into
Cardiopulmonary Science Program and Polysomnography Track
• Corequisites: PSG 4000 and PSG 4800L
Provides laboratory instruction and practical experience in
polysomnographic techniques used in neonatal, pediatric and adult
populations. Topics include related medical terminology, conducting
of a patient sleep history, patient assessment, patient preparation,
instrumentation setup and calibration, MSLT (multiple sleep latency
test), recording and monitoring techniques, documentation, patienttechnologist
interactions. This course is an extension of
Polysomnographic Technology III.
PSG 4001 3 3 0
POLYSOMNOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY IV
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of “C” in PSG 4000, PSG 4000L,
and PSG 4800L
• Corequisites: PSG 4001L and PSG 4801L
This course provides instruction in advanced aspects of
Polysomnographic Technology. This course expands upon the topics
covered in Polysomnographic Technology III and expands on
neonatal and pediatric sleep medicine trends, biostatistics, and
treatment plans. Students will become familiar with the skills and
knowledge needed to obtain and evaluate high quality sleep
recordings. Topics include: sleep scoring and event recognition,
instrumentation setup and calibration, recording and monitoring
techniques, documentation, therapeutic interventions, specialty
sleep studies and patient-technologist.
PSG 4001L 1 0 3
POLYSOMNOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY IV LABORATORY
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of “C” in PSG 4000, PSG 4000L,
and PSG 4800L
• Corequisites: PSG 4001 and PSG 4801L
Provides laboratory instruction in advanced aspects of
polysomnographic technology. Topics include: sleep scoring and event
recognition, instrumentation setup and calibration, recording and
monitoring techniques, documentation, therapeutic interventions,
specialty sleep studies and patient-technologist interactions related to
polysomnographic technology in the neonatal, pediatric and adult
population. This course is an extension of Polysomnographic
Technology IV.
PSG 4800L 1 0 6
POLYSOMNOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY CLINICAL III PRACTICUM
• Prerequisites: A.S. Degree in Respiratory Care and
admission into Cardiopulmonary Science program and
Polysomnography Track
• Corequisites: PSG 4000 and PSG 4000L
An introduction to polysomnographic procedures performed in the
clinical setting with neonatal, pediatric and adult patients. Students
will observe, perform (under supervision), and evaluate basic sleep
studies. Students will be required to master the skills of: conducting a
complete sleep history, patient assessment, patient preparation and
instrumentation setup, calibration and operation, recording and
monitoring procedures during the test, documentation, record keeping
and patient-technologist interactions.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Religion Respiratory Care
327
PSG 4801L 1 0 6
POLYSOMNOGRAPHIC TECHNOLOGY CLINICAL IV PRACTICUM
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in PSG 4000, PSG 4000L and
PSG 4800L
• Corequisites: PSG 4001 and PSG 4001L
2
This course is designed to continue the development of skills and
concepts begun in Practicum III. Students will observe, perform (under
supervision), and evaluate basic and advanced sleep studies for
neonatal, pediatric and adult patients. In addition, this course will
focus more on the scoring of sleep studies, therapeutic interventions
used, and more advanced and specialized aspects of Polysomnography
designed to prepare the student for employment in any sleep lab and
to take the RPSGT and/or SDS credentialing examination. Students will
be required to master the skills of: sleep scoring and event recognition,
CPAP titration, therapeutic and pharmacological interventions,
specialty sleep studies and patient-technologist interactions related to
Polysomnographic Technology
RET 1025C 6 4 6
PRINCIPLES OF RESPIRATORY CARE
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Respiratory Care A.S.
Degree program
• Prerequisite or corequisite: BSC 2093C
Course and laboratory experience designed for beginning respiratory
care student. Introduction and working knowledge of state of the art:
basic principles of equipment operation and therapeutic objectives for
administration of medical gases, humidity, aerosol, therapy modalities
and airway management. This course includes learning activity
designed to ensure competence in oral communication.
(Special Fee: $67.00)
RET 1264C 4 3 3
PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICAL VENTILATION
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1275C, RET 1295C,
and RET 1450C
Functions of advanced respiratory equipment including: negative and
positive pressure mechanical ventilators, indications, initiation,
monitoring, management, and complications. Bedside assessment and
evaluation prior to and during weaning from ventilation support.
(Special Fee: $31.00)
RET 1275C 4 3 3
CLINICAL CARE TECHNIQUES
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1025C and RET 1485C
Presents basic principles and essential skills necessary to perform
patient care safely and effectively. Includes medical asepsis,
terminology, communication, patient assessment and position, medical
ethics, and behavioral problems unique to patients with respiratory
illness. Orientation to clinical rotation. Student must maintain C grade
through didactic portion to participate in clinical setting.
(Special Fee: $42.00)
RET 1295C 4 3 3
CHEST MEDICINE
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1025C and
RET 1485C
Respiratory care students investigate nature and cause of
cardiopulmonary diseases that involve changes in structure and
function. Presents etiology, clinical manifestations, pathogenesis, lab
data and treatment for major chronic and acute pulmonary disease
entities. This course includes learning activity designed to ensure
competence in oral communication. (Special Fee: $26.00)
RET 1450C 3 2 3
BASIC PHYSIOLOGIC MONITORING
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1025C and
RET 1485C
Emphasis on basic diagnostic and monitoring principles used in
determining clinical evaluation of patients. Cardiopulmonary
assessment using electrocardiography, chest roentgenography and lab
test. (Special Fee: $32.00)
RET 1485C 4 3 3
CARDIOPULMONARY PHYSIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: Acceptance to Respiratory Care A.S.
Degree program
Course emphasis on the functions of the pulmonary system as it
relates to ventilation, regulation of breathing, respirations and gas
exchange. We introduce common factors effecting oxygen and carbon
dioxide transport. An emphasis on the cardiovascular system and
cellular respiration compared to the manifestations of disease and
blood gas analysis. (Special Fee: $10.00)
RET 1874L 4 0 24
CLINICAL PRACTICE I
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1275C, RET 1295C,
and RET 1450C
• Corequisite: Department approval
Student assigned clinical tasks in patient floor care under supervision
of staff respiratory therapist or clinical instructor. (Special Fee: $43.00)
RET 1875L 4 0 24
CLINICAL PRACTICE II
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1264C and RET 1874L
Student is assigned clinical practice in critical care environments
under the supervision of a staff respiratory therapist or clinical
instructor. An emphasis on mechanical ventilation including
advanced patient care for the pediatric and neonatal population.
(Special Fee: $93.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Respiratory Care Respiratory Care
328
RET 2244C 3 2 3
LIFE SUPPORT
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1264C and RET 1874L
Emphasis on advanced cardiopulmonary assessment diagnostic and
invasive monitoring techniques. (Special Fee: $16.00)
RET 2350C 4 3 3
RESPIRATORY PHARMACOLOGY
• Prerequisites: BSC 2094C or department approval and
acceptance to Respiratory Care A.S. Degree program
History of pharmacology, regulatory agencies and regulations
concerning use of drugs. Drug action, absorption, distribution and use
in human body. Emphasis on respiratory drugs, cardiac drugs and
related drugs therapist is exposed to in a hospital.
RET 2714C 4 3 3
PEDIATRIC RESPIRATORY CARE
• Prerequisite: RET 1264C or department approval
Instruction includes the following areas: development and physiology
of fetal and neonatal lung, perinatal circulation, neonatal pulmonary
disorders, treatment of perinatal patients with respiratory care
techniques and pediatric respiratory therapy. (Special Fee: $25.00)
RET 2876L 4 0 24
CLINICAL PRACTICE III
• Prerequisites: Minimum grades of C in RET 1875L, RET 2244C,
and RET 2714C
Students are assigned clinical practice in clinical care environments
under the supervision of a staff respiratory therapist or clinical
instructor. An emphasis on mechanical ventilation and hemodynamic
monitoring in the adult, pediatric, and neonatal population.
(Special Fee: $123.00)
RET 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN RESPIRATORY CARE
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in respiratory care based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and the professor. May include laboratory and/or
field work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each
time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
Restaurant and Food Service Management
See Hospitality and Tourism, Baking and Pastry Management, Culinary
Management, and Restaurant Management for course descriptions.
Sign Language
ASL 2140 (Formerly SPA 2612) 4 4 0
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE I
Introduction to American Sign Language with emphasis on vocabulary
used by deaf adults. Includes introduction to history and culture of
deafness in America, linguistic structure and conceptual vocabulary of
conversational (expressive and receptive) sign language skills.
Describes various manual communication systems and philosophies. A
minimum grade of C is required if being used to satisfy the General
Education Foreign Language Proficiency requirement.
ASL 2150 (Formerly SPA 2613) 4 4 0
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE II
• Prerequisite: ASL 2140 or department approval
Continuation of SPA 2612 emphasizing intermediate level sign
vocabulary and use of signing space. Provides greater opportunity for
skill development in ASL structure and introduces ASL idioms. A
minimum grade of C is required if being used to satisfy the General
Education Foreign Language Proficiency requirement.
ASL 2160 (Formerly SPA 2614) 4 4 0
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE III
• Prerequisite: ASL 2150 or department approval
Advanced course for students who have previous course work in other
manual communication systems, but have no extensive background in
the grammatical structure and regional idiomatic usage of American
Sign Language. The production of non-voiced, conversational,
spontaneous signed sentences is the goal of this course. Emphasis on
the ability to "read" signed phrases and sentences will be an integral
part of this course. A minimum grade of C is required if being used to
satisfy the General Education Foreign Language Proficiency
requirement.
ASL 2200 (Formerly SPA 2615) 4 4 0
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE IV
• Prerequisite: ASL 2160 or department approval
Designed for students who have previous course work in other manual
communication systems in the complex grammar, facial expression,
metaphorical and idiomatic vocabulary of American Sign Language.
Gives students advanced skills in fluent, conversational receptive and
expressive American Sign Language. Additional production of nonvoiced,
conversational, spontaneous signed sentences is the goal of
this course. Continued emphasis on the ability to "read" signed phrases
and sentences will be an integral part of the course.
ASL 2300 (Formerly SPA 2611) 3 3 0
STRUCTURE OF AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
• Prerequisite: ASL 2150
A study of the phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, and
discourse structure of American Sign Language, with additional
discussions of the biological basis of language and communication.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Respiratory Care Sign Language
329
ASL 2430 2 2 0
FINGERSPELLING
• Prerequisite: ASL 2150
The study and practice of fingerspelling techniques to improve receptive
and expressive fingerspelling proficiency beyond basic skill levels.
ASL 2510 (Formerly SPA 2560) 3 3 0
DEAF CULTURE
An overview of deafness with emphasis on its impact on the
individual, the family, and the social patterns of the deaf community
and culture, as well as historical and changing attitudes toward
persons with disabilities.
ASL 2600 3 3 0
METHODS OF TEACHING AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ASL 2160 or departmental
approval
Provides overview of how second languages have traditionally been
taught, discusses current theories and approaches in curriculum
design and instructional methods in second language acquisition and
the teaching and learning of American Sign Language and deaf
community and culture. Students are provided opportunities to
practice basic teaching techniques, select appropriate materials,
design curriculum and evaluation techniques, including how to teach
cultural and grammatical features in lessons. Students learn about
resources to support their efforts to teach sign language.
ASL 260 3 3 0
1ST AND 2ND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION IN ASL
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ASL 2160 or
departmental approval
This course discusses the nature and issues of first and second
language acquisition (SLA), the findings of SLA and possible
implications in teaching ASL as a native/heritage language and/or a
second/world language; outlining issues in ASL/Deaf Studies, second
language teaching and offers perspectives into such issues.
ASL 2701 3 3 0
AMERICAN SIGN LANGUAGE LITERATURE
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ASL 2160 or
departmental approval
Introduction to American Sign Language literature as recorded on
videotape or film, and in live performance, art, traditional folklore,
storytelling, poetry, drama, oratory, jokes, and nonfiction narrative;
analysis of genres in their social and cultural contexts as expressions of
deaf identity and the deaf experience; how historical and current
issues in deaf culture are represented in literary form.
INT 2131 (Formerly SPA 2464 and SPA 2659) 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO INTERPRETING
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in ASL 2510, or
departmental approval
Provides an introduction to the role of the interpreter, highlighting the
application of the National Registry of Interpreters for the Deaf
Professional Code of Conduct in daily interaction with deaf and
hearing consumers. Also includes discussion of basic theories,
guidelines, principles, and practices of interpreting. Environmental
considerations of communication and interpreting will be discussed.
Additional fees will be required for the Florida Registry of Interpreters
for the Deaf testing.
INT 2200 (Formerly SPA 2667) 3 3 0
INTERACTIVE INTERPRETING I
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in INT 2131 or
departmental approval
This course is a continuation of INT 2131 with an emphasis on
production of a signed interpretation of a voiced message. This course
provides more advanced application of techniques and principles of a
signed interpretation of a voiced message. Students will practice using
audiotape, videotape, CD and DVD materials to reinforce skill
development. Live role-play and modeling techniques permit students
to experience a variety of interactive/interview interpreting settings
INT 2201 (Formerly SPA 2668) 3 3 0
INTERACTIVE INTERPRETING II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in INT 2200 or
departmental approval
This course is a continuation of INT 2200 and a transition into handson
language production with clarity and understanding. This course
provides advanced in-depth discussion and application of techniques
and principles, as well as expanded concentration on advanced
expressive and receptive manual communication skills. Students will
use audiotape, videotape, CD and DVD materials to reinforce skill
development to improve speed and accuracy in their expressive and
receptive intermediate interpreting skills.
INT 2202 3 3 0
INTERACTIVE INTERPRETING III
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in INT 2201 or
departmental approval
This course is a continuation of INT 2201. This course leads the student
through the steps of making a compressed, idiomatic English voicing
product that accurately relays the deaf signer’s expanded message. The
three components of understanding, telling, and saying will be the
main focus of the course. Videotaped and live models will be used for
skill development.
INT 2203 2 2 0
INTERACTIVE INTERPRETING IV
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in INT 2202 or
departmental approval
A continuation of INT 2202. This course provides extensive hands-on
practice using skills, strategies, and techniques learned in the first
three courses of the interpreting sequence. Real-time English to ASL
interpreting is the focus of this course.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Sign Language Sign Language
330
INT 2210 3 3 0
TRANSLITERATING
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of C in INT 2203 or
departmental approval
This course is designed to explain and reinforce the features of the
transliteration process. The students will be guided into developing
skills for expressive transliterating through presentation and
participation. Audio taped, videotaped and live materials will be used
for skill development.
INT 2941 (Formerly SPA 2941) 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN SIGN LANGUAGE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including INT 2201. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
* American Sign Language course work may not satisfy the foreign
language graduation requirements at some universities.
Social Sciences
AFA 2000 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN EXPERIENCE
An interdisciplinary examination of the African-American culture as
an expression of its African heritage and a response to economic,
social, cultural, and political pressures in the New World.
ISS 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES
For students interested in special topics and interdisciplinary
exploration related to various social sciences fields through research,
discussion, and observation. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored each
time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Sociology
SYG 2000 3 3 0
INTRODUCTORY SOCIOLOGY
Enables student to understand social behavior and social processes
and become familiar with vocabulary and methodology in the
discipline of sociology. Emphasis on culture and personality, age and
sex roles, family, deviant behavior, social class and stratification, group
behavior and social change.
SYG 2000H 3 3 0
INTRODUCTORY SOCIOLOGY - HONORS
Same as SYG 2000. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
SYG 2010 3 3 0
CONTEMPORARY AMERICAN SOCIAL PROBLEMS
Analysis of major social problems confronting American society.
Special emphasis on critical thinking abilities in evaluating causes,
effects and various approaches in dealing with social problems.
Discussion includes such topics as mental illness, crime, juvenile
delinquency, race relations, pollution, population, urbanization and
influences detrimental to family stability: divorce, alcoholism,
gambling, drug abuse.
SYG 2320 3 3 0
DEVIANT BEHAVIOR
Examination of sociological, social-psychological, and criminological
theories of deviant behavior. Major topics include murder, rape,
heterosexual deviance, homosexual deviance, urbanization, deviance,
alcoholism, drug abuse, mental disorder, suicide, and other criminal
and non-criminal forms of deviant behavior.
SYG 2430 3 3 0
MARRIAGE AND THE FAMILY
Assists student in developing perspective regarding areas of
adjustment in marriage and family living. Attention to premarital
behavior patterns, love and mate selections, communication, family
finances, sexual relations, parenthood, divorce, widowhood and
remarriage.
SYG 2935 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN SOCIOLOGY
• Prerequisite: SYG 2000 or department approval
For students interested in exploring special topics in sociology through
research, discussion and observation. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
SYG 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN SOCIOLOGY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including SYG 2000. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Sign Language Sociology
331
Sonography
To register for any of the Sonography courses, you must apply and be
accepted to the Diagnostic Medical Sonography program.
SON 1000C 3 2 4
INTRODUCTION TO MEDICAL SONOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: BSC 2093C and acceptance to Sonography A. S.
Degree program
• Prerequisites or corequisites: BSC 2094C and HSC 1531
• Corequisite: HSC 1230C
A course designed to introduce the student to the Radiology
Department and to the interaction of the Diagnostic Ultrasound
Department with the other imaging departments. This course will also
include darkroom procedures, film processing, basic ultrasound
procedures, and a hands-on lab. (Special Fee: $26.00)
SON 1001C 4 3 4
ABDOMINAL SONOGRAPHY I
• Prerequisite: SON 1000C
• Prerequisite or corequisite: RTE 2762 (Minimum grade of C
required if used as a prerequisite)
• Corequisite: SON 1804L
This course is an in-depth study in the sonographic imaging of the
abdominal viscera and the pathological processes that affect this area
of the body. This course also includes sonographic terminology and
correlation of the ultrasound findings with clinical laboratory test. This
course includes a hands-on lab with activities designed to ensure
competence in the basic use of computers and to enhance scanning
skills (Special Fee: $22.00)
SON 1003L 2 0 2
SONOGRAPHY PRACTICE LAB
• Prerequisite and/or Corequisite: SON 1000C
This course is designed to provide extended hands-on lab
opportunities to further enhance basic skills prior to starting the
clinical rotation. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for credit for
a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
SON 1112C 4 3 2
ABDOMINAL SONOGRAPHY II
• Prerequisites: RTE 2762, SON 1001C and SON 1804L
• Corequisites: SON 1614 and SON 1814L
This course is a continuation of Abdominal Sonography I. It is an indepth
study in the sonographic imaging of the abdominal viscera and
the pathological processes that affect this area of the body. The course
also includes correlation of the ultrasound findings with clinical
laboratory tests and a hands-on lab. (Special Fee: $16.00)
SON 1614 3 3 0
ACOUSTICAL PHYSICS AND INSTRUMENTATION I
• Prerequisite: SON 1001C
• Corequisites: SON 1112C and SON 1814L
A study of the properties of diagnostic ultrasound and the effective
utilization of them to produce quality scans. This course covers
propagation of sound through a medium, transducer construction,
different types of scan heads, and the different display modes.
SON 1804L 2 0 16
CLINICAL SONOGRAPHY I
• Prerequisite: SON 1000C
• Prerequisite or corequisite: RTE 2762
• Corequisite: SON 1001C
Supervised clinical experience and competency evaluation of
professional interaction and performance of sonographic procedures
with emphasis on patient care, ultrasound computer equipment
orientation, cross-sectional imaging planes, and performance of
quality exams. This course includes learning activity designed to
ensure competence in the basic use of computers. (Special Fee: $23.00)
SON 1814L 2 0 16
CLINICAL SONOGRAPHY II
• Prerequisite: SON 1804L
• Corequisites: SON 1112C and SON 1614
A continuation of supervised clinical experience and competency
evaluation of performance of routine sonographic procedures,
usage of computerized ultrasound equipment and professional
interaction. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking skills as related to
exam performance and patient care in the clinical setting.
(Special Fee: $3.00)
SON 2061 4 4 0
SEMINAR IN SONOGRAPHY
• Prerequisite: SON 2122
• Corequisite: SON 2882L
This course is a comprehensive review of all aspects of the Sonography
curriculum to prepare the students for the Board Exams. Also included
is the preparation of employment résumés. (Special Fee: $50.00)
SON 2121 3 3 0
OB/GYN SONOGRAPHY I
• Prerequisite: SON 1112C
• Corequisites: SON 2150, SON 2618 and SON 2824L
This course includes an in-depth study of the female pelvis with
emphasis on the sonographic appearance of its structure and the
numerous pathological processes that may affect it. The course will
continue with early pregnancy and its complications.
SON 2122 3 3 0
OB/GYN SONOGRAPHY II
• Prerequisite: SON 2121
• Corequisites: SON 2619 and SON 2834L
This course is a continuation of SON 2121 which includes the
sonographic evaluation of pregnancy and related complications.
Emphasis is placed on the detection of fetal anomalies, pathology, and
the scan planes necessary for appropriate imaging.
SON 2150 3 3 0
NEUROSONOLOGY AND SUPERFICIAL STRUCTURES
• Prerequisite: SON 1112C
• Corequisites: SON 2121, SON 2618 and SON 2824L
This course is a study of the sonographic imaging of the premature
infant brain and the pathological processes that affect it. Also included
are the sonographic evaluations of the prostate, scrotum, thyroid
gland, and breast.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Sonography Sonography
332
SON 2618 3 3 0
ACOUSTICAL PHYSICS AND INSTRUMENTATION II
• Prerequisite: SON 1614
• Corequisites: SON 2121, SON 2150 and SON 2824L
This course is a continuation in the study of the properties of
diagnostic ultrasound and their role in the production of quality
ultrasound images of patients’ internal organs. Also covers
hemodynamics, the basic mathematical principals and
instrumentation of Doppler/color flow imaging, and components of
the ultrasound system.
SON 2619 2 2 0
ACOUSTICAL PHYSICS AND INSTRUMENTATION III
• Prerequisite: SON 2618
• Corequisites: SON 2122 and SON 2834L
This course is a continuation in the study of the properties of
diagnostic ultrasound and their role in the production of quality
images, which includes resolution and attenuation artifacts, routine
maintenance of the ultrasound equipment, and the biologic effects of
ultrasound on body tissues. Also included is a review for the Acoustical
Physics and Instrumentation Registry Exam.
SON 2824L 3 0 24
CLINICAL SONOGRAPHY III
• Prerequisite: SON 1814L
• Corequisites: SON 2121, SON 2150 and SON 2618
A continuation of supervised clinical experience and competency
evaluation of performance of routine sonographic procedures,
computerized ultrasound machine skills and professional interaction.
Emphasis is placed on critical thinking skills as related to exam
performance and patient care in the clinical setting. Students will
be required to research selected case studies and prepare oral
presentations to be presented to the radiologist. (Special Fee: $23.00)
SON 2834L 3 0 24
CLINICAL SONOGRAPHY IV
• Prerequisite: SON 2824L
• Corequisites: SON 2122 and SON 2619
This course is a continuation of supervised clinical experience and
competency evaluation of performance of routine sonographic
procedures, computerized ultrasound machine skills and professional
interaction. Emphasis is placed on critical thinking skills as related to
exam performance and patient care in the clinical setting. Students
will be required to research selected case studies and prepare oral
presentations to be presented to the radiologist. (Special Fee: $3.00)
SON 2882L 2 0 32
MEDICAL SONOGRAPHY CLINICAL PRACTICUM
• Prerequisite: SON 2834L
• Corequisite: SON 2061
This is the final course in the clinical education sequence. Students
will perform routine procedures with minimal supervision. Emphasis is
placed on critical thinking skills as related to exam performance and
patient care in the clinical setting. Students will be required to
research selected case studies and prepare oral presentations to be
presented to the radiologist.
SON 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN SONOGRAPHY
• Prerequisite: Department approval
Selected topics in sonography based on the needs and areas of interest
of the class and professor. May include laboratory work as part of the
class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 3
credits provided different topic explored each time, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
SON 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN SONOGRAPHY
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Spanish
SPN 1000 3 3 0
CONVERSATIONAL SPANISH
Conversational Spanish is a communicative based course. Students will
be introduced to basic conversation using speaking, listening, reading
and writing skills. This course does not satisfy the college’s foreign
language requirement and is not open to native speakers.
SPN 1001 3 3 0
CONVERSATIONAL SPANISH II
• Prerequisites: SPN 1000 or department approval
Conversational Spanish II is a communicative based course and a
continuation of Conversational Spanish I. Students will continue
learning basic language skills necessary for practical daily applications
in different social settings. Conversation will be enhanced using
speaking, listening, reading and writing skills. This course will be
taught utilizing a variety of multisensory techniques that foster the
development of oral proficiency in Spanish. This course does not
satisfy the foreign language proficiency requirements and is not open
to native speakers.
SPN 1120 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY SPANISH I
Emphasis on everyday use of the language, integrating basic grammar,
vocabulary, composition, and culture through a conversational
approach to Spanish. Not open to native speakers. A minimum grade of
C is required to pass this course if being used to satisfy the Foreign
Language Proficiency Requirement.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Sonography Spanish
333
SPN 1121 4 4 0
ELEMENTARY SPANISH II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in SPN 1120 or equivalent
(SPN 1100 or two years of high school Spanish completed within
the last three years and department approval)
Continuation of fundamental skills in Spanish comprehension,
expression, and structure. Increasing awareness and understanding of
the culture. A minimum grade of C is required to pass this course if
being used to satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency Requirement.
SPN 1340 4 4 0
SPANISH FOR HERITAGE SPEAKERS
• Prerequisite: Oral proficiency in the language with no
formal background
This course is designed for heritage speakers of Spanish who have
acquired oral proficiency in a non-academic environment. The
activities in this course will improve several aspects of language
learning: oral comprehension, speaking, reading comprehension and
analysis, and writing skills. The emphasis will be on improving
linguistic skills through specific grammatical and lexical studies
designed to meet the particular needs of heritage speakers of Spanish.
Special attention will be given to Hispanic culture. A minimum grade
of C is required if being used to satisfy the Foreign Language
Proficiency Requirement.
SPN 1341 4 4 0
SPANISH FOR HERITAGE SPEAKERS II
• Prerequisite: Minimum grade of C in SPN 1340 or
departmental approval
Spanish for Heritage Speakers II is a continuation of SPN 1340. It is a
course designed to address the needs of Hispanic students whose
heritage language is the target language and who have had some
formal Spanish language instruction. They can communicate in
Spanish, but need to improve and master their reading, speaking and
writing skills. This course addresses specific linguistic issues such as
diction, orthography, and sentence structure. Special attention will be
given to Hispanic culture. A minimum grade of C is required if being
used to satisfy the Foreign Language Proficiency Requirement.
SPN 2200 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE SPANISH I
• Prerequisite: SPN 1101 or SPN 1121, or department approval
Conversational approach with readings adapted from Spanish
newspapers, magazines, short novels, Spanish essays, poems, and a
wide variety of Spanish articles. Emphasis on written narrative as well
as language integrating grammar through compositions, vocabulary,
films, presentations, and culture presentations.
SPN 2201 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II
• Prerequisite: SPN 2200 or department approval
Conversational approach with readings adapted from Spanish
newspapers, magazines, short stories, and film. Increasing awareness
and understanding of the Spanish culture.
SPN 2201H 3 3 0
INTERMEDIATE SPANISH II - HONORS
Same as SPN 2201. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
SPN 2930 1-3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN SPANISH
For students interested in exploring special topics in Spanish.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
SPN 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN SPANISH
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including a foreign language course at the intermediate
level. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program Coordinator
or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to provide
override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits,
but grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Speech
SPC 1017 3 3 0
INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATION
Students explore a range of communication concepts and topics from
interpersonal communication, to small group communication, to
public speaking. Students develop skills to put the communication
principles to work.
SPC 1017H 3 3 0
INTERPERSONAL COMMUNICATIONJHONORS
Same as SPC 1017. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
SPC 1608 3 3 0
FUNDAMENTALS OF SPEECH
Principles of oral communication common to speaking and listening.
Emphasis on listening techniques, preparation, and delivery
techniques for extemporaneous speaking.
SPC 1608H 3 3 0
FUNDAMENTALS OF SPEECH - HONORS
Same as SPC 1608. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Spanish Speech
334
SPC 1700 3 3 0
CROSS CULTURAL COMMUNICATION
Study and application of awareness skills for communication with
people of other cultures. Upon completion, student uses problem
analysis skills when communicating with people of other cultures.
SPC 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN SPEECH
Seminar for students interested in research, discussion, and
observation of special topics in speech. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Student Career Development
SLS 1301 3 3 0
CAREER DEVELOPMENT
Student develops a personal profile of skills, interests, and values in
the process of clarifying career and educational goals. The course
activities include self-assessment, exploring occupational options, and
developing job search techniques. A model for making career decisions
is also included.
SLS 1303 1 1 0
JOB SEARCH
A course in which the student learns how to best prepare for seeking
employment in their chosen profession. Students will prepare a
personal résumé and interview request letter, develop a list of
potential employers and learn interview strategies. The course will be
a combination of lecture, audio/visual aids and class interactions.
SLS 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN CAREER AND LIFE PLANNING
Student develops and explores in depth stated personal objectives
and goals as related to potential career areas and life planning.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
SLS 2941 3 3 0
ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP/INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits. The Program Director/Program Chair/Program
Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the discretion to
provide override approval as it relates to the waiver of required
program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. In
addition, students will process the experience via seminars. Multiple
credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
Student Life Skills
SLS 1101 1 1 0
COLLEGE SURVIVAL SKILLS
Provides students knowledge and skills for college survival. Includes an
introduction to the college and its resources, selected study skills and
personal resource management skills. Students identify skill areas and
levels they wish to improve. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for credit for a maximum of three credits, but grade forgiveness cannot
be applied.
SLS 1122 3 3 0
STUDENT SUCCESS
Students learn and apply strategies for success in college and life-long
learning. Major topics include setting academic, career and personal
goals; effective communication; study strategies; critical thinking; selfdiscovery;
learning styles and mastering Valencia’s core competencies.
Students develop education and career plans utilizing college
resources.
SLS 1201 3 3 0
PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT
Students will learn and apply proven strategies to become
active, responsible, and successful learners. Major topics include
personal self-responsibility, self-motivation, self-management, selfawareness,
interdependence, emotional intelligence, life-long
learning, and self-esteem.
SLS 2261H 3 3 0
LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENTJHONORS
• Prerequisites: Minimum grade of “C” in ENC 1101 or ENC 1101H or
IDH 1110
This course will provide a basic understanding of leadership theory
and group dynamics. Students will focus on leadership through the
integration of readings in the humanities, contemporary case studies,
film, experiential exercises, and group projects. Course content will
satisfy one Honors Program learning outcome. Honors program
permission required.
SLS 1505 3 3 0
CREATIVE LIFE SKILLS
Students explore, critically and collaboratively, their personal
values and life ambitions; develop their creative talents and interests;
explore their life purpose and create a positive vision for the future;
make wise and authentic choices in education, career and life;
practice creative thinking, problem-solving and community-building,
and apply imaginative leadership to challenges in the local and
global communities.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Speech Student Life Skills
335
SLS 2711 1 1 0
PEER TUTOR TRAINING
• Prerequisite: Department approval
This course is offered to students who work in a peer tutoring
role at the college. This course will combine instructional training
and tutoring scenarios. Tutors will be engaged in a discussion
of psychological and learning theories; tutors will learn how to
apply these theories along with study coaching and tutoring
techniques to help students (tutees) improve their learning and
educational experience.
SLS 2940 1 - 4 variable
SERVICE LEARNING
• Prerequisite: Minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA; or
department approval
This course gives the student the opportunity to grow academically,
pre-professionally, personally and civically through participation in a
service-learning experience. Students meet real needs in the
community by applying knowledge from their courses. Students
complete 20 hours of service per credit, complete written reflections,
and meet regularly with assigned faculty member. Multiple credit
course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 credits, but grade
forgiveness cannot be applied.
SLS 2940H 1-4 1-4 0
SERVICE LEARNING-HONORS
• Prerequisite: Minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA; or
department approval
Same as SLS 2940. In addition, course content will satisfy one Honors
Program learning outcome. Honors Program permission required.
Surveying Technology
See Civil/Surveying Engineering Technology for course descriptions.
Theatre and Entertainment
THE 1020 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO THEATRE
An overview of the Theatre Arts. Includes a study of theatre
practitioners and their craft, including playwrights, directors, actors,
and designers/technicians. Includes a general overview of theatre
history, and reading and analysis of plays from various genres and
periods. Attendance at outside play performances is required.
THE 1100 3 3 0
INTRODUCTION TO THEATRE HISTORY
Survey of the development of theatre and drama from prehistory
through the present. Representative plays studied.
THE 2304 (Formerly THE 2300) 3 3 0
SCRIPT ANALYSIS
An introduction to the analysis and interpretation of play scripts, as
preparation for production. Students will read plays from various
periods and genres, and analyze such dramatic elements as plot,
theme, character, dialogue, and style.
THE 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN THEATRE
For students interested in exploring special topics in theatre through
research, discussion and observation. Multiple credit course. May be
repeated for a maximum of 6 credits provided different topic explored
each time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
TPA 1200 4 2 3
BASIC STAGECRAFT
Focuses on techniques of scenic construction, installation and
budgeting, using hands-on assignments to complement lectures. Topics
include interpreting drawings, tool use, material selection, painting
and safety. (Special Fee: $39.00)
TPA 1202 3 2 3
FUNDAMENTALS OF ENTERTAINMENT TECHNOLOGY
Practical exploration of engineering principles used in the
entertainment industry. Applies theoretical concepts in a laboratory
setting. (Special Fee: $33.00)
TPA 1232 3 2 2
COSTUME TECHNIQUES AND WARDROBE PRACTICES
Emphasis on planning, execution and running of costumes for
production. (Special Fee: $41.00)
TPA 1248 3 2 2
MAKEUP FOR THE STAGE
Study of principles, materials and applications of theatrical makeup.
(Special Fee: $10.00)
TPA 1380 2 2 1
SURVEY OF ENTERTAINMENT TECHNOLOGY
Explores the range of employment options in the Central Florida
Entertainment Industry including digital media, film production, music
and sound, and entertainment design and technology with a focus on
career and educational planning for success.
TPA 2000 3 3 0
CREATIVE DESIGN FOR THE THEATRE
Involves students in preliminary concepts of stage, lighting, and
custom design. Teaches student history of theatrical presentation and
motivation for design concepts. (Special Fee: $25.00)
TPA 2030 3 2 2
LIGHTING DESIGN FOR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT
• Prerequisite: TPA 2220
This course will focus on lighting design for theatre and other live
entertainment productions. Students will develop proficiency in script
analysis, light plots, lighting paperwork and lighting designs in a
laboratory setting. Students will use lighting visualization software
such as WYSIWYG to complete lighting designs. (Special Fee: $58.00)
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Student Life Skills Theatre and Entertainment
336
TPA 2063 3 2 0
PRINCIPLES OF SCENERY DESIGN
• Prerequisites: TPA 2000 and TPA 2343
Introductory design techniques including design development,
presentation and execution. The student will complete ground plans,
perspective sketches and scenic models of single set stage designs.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
TPA 2190C 3 1 10
THEATRE DESIGN PRACTICUM
• Prerequisites: TPA 2000, TPA 2030, TPA 2063, and TPA 2292C;
and department approval
This is a production-based capstone experience that will require
students to serve in a key design or assistant design role in a Valencia
Theatre production. Requires a minimum of 10 hours per week on
costume, lighting or scenery design assignment. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Special Fee: $18.00)
TPA 2220 4 3 2
INTRODUCTION TO STAGE LIGHTING
Stage lighting techniques, practices and equipment. Includes electrical
theory, use of dimming systems and implementation of lighting
designs. This course includes learning activity designed to ensure
competence in oral communication. (Special Fee: $36.00)
TPA 2221 3 2 2
INTERMEDIATE STAGE LIGHTING
• Prerequisite: TPA 2220
Stage lighting techniques, practices and equipment. Focuses on control
board operation, selection of lighting equipment, implementation of
lighting designs and troubleshooting lighting systems.
(Special Fee: $10.00)
TPA 2222 4 3 2
ADVANCED STAGE LIGHTING
• Prerequisite: TPA 2220
A hands-on exploration of specialized lighting equipment and
techniques used in live entertainment. Emphasizes lighting in nontheatrical
spaces, computerized lighting control, and intelligent
lighting fixtures. (Special Fee: $71.00)
TPA 2252 3 2 2
INTRODUCTION TO AUDIO VISUAL TECHNOLOGY
An introduction to the audio visual technology and practices of the
entertainment industry. The course will focus on the set-up, operation
and troubleshooting of basic audio visual equipment including video
and slide projectors, monitors, computers and projection screens.
(Special Fee: $20.00)
TPA 2257 3 1 10
AUDIO VISUAL PRODUCTION
The student will participate as an audio visual technician for theatre,
dance, film or music events. Requires a minimum of 10 hours per week
for a production or pre-production assignment. (Special Fee: $23.00)
TPA 2260 4 3 2
INTRODUCTION TO AUDIO PRODUCTION
This course introduces students to the theory and practices of sound
reinforcement, and recording for the entertainment industry. It covers
audio equipment, sound systems, recording techniques and sound
reinforcement for live events with a hands-on, project-focused
approach. (Special Fee: $24.00)
TPA 2290 3 1 10
TECHNICAL THEATRE PRODUCTION
The student will participate as technician in dramatic productions at
the college. Requires a minimum of 10 hours per week production or
post-production assignment. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 12 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $45.00)
TPA 2292C 3 1 10
ADVANCED TECHNICAL PRODUCTION
• Prerequisites: TPA 1200, TPA 2220, TPA 2260, and TPA 2290; and
department approval
This production based capstone experience will require that students
serve in a key crew head or design role on one to two Valencia Theatre
productions. Requires a minimum of 10 hours per week in a crew head
or design assignment. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 6 credits, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
(Special Fee: $18.00)
TPA 2343 3 3 0
COMPUTER-ASSISTED DRAFTING FOR THE ENTERTAINMENT
INDUSTRY
An introduction to computer-assisted drafting using industry-standard
applications like CAD and Vector Works. Emphasizes creating standard
working drawings used in the entertainment industry. This course
includes learning activity designed to ensure competence in the basic
use of computers. (Special Fee: $31.00)
TPA 2600 3 3 0
STAGE AND PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT
• Prerequisites: TPA 1380 and THE 1020
An introduction to the organization and management of a live
entertainment production. The course will focus on the paperwork,
budgeting and scheduling required to manage a production along with
collaborative leadership in the execution of an entertainment
production.
TPA 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN THEATRE TECHNOLOGY
Selected topics in theatre technology based on the needs and areas of
interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or field
work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a
maximum of 3 credits provided different topic explored each time, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Theatre and Entertainment Theatre and Entertainment
337
TPA 2941 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP EXPLORATION IN THEATRE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including TPA 2290 and THE 1020 or TPA 1200 or TPA 1210
or TPA 2220 or TPA 2260. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with supervised career exploration activities and/or practical
experiences to assist in confirming their education plans. Each earned
credit of Internship requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work.
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 4 hours, but
grade forgiveness cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
TPA 2942 1 - 4 variable
INTERNSHIP IN THEATRE
• Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of all mandatory courses
in reading, mathematics, English, and English for Academic
Purposes. A minimum 2.0 institutional or overall GPA, and 12
credits, including a total of 4 courses with TPA or MUM prefixes
to include TPA 2290 or TPA 2257. The Program Director/Program
Chair/Program Coordinator or Internship Placement Office has the
discretion to provide override approval as it relates to the waiver
of required program/discipline-related courses.
This course is a planned work-based experience that provides students
with an opportunity to fine-tune skill sets learned in course work and
enhance workplace skills through supervised practical experiences
related to their career objectives. Each earned credit of Internship
requires a minimum of 80 clock hours of work. Multiple credit course.
May be repeated for a maximum of 4 hours, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied. (Internship Fee: $10.00)
TPP 1110 3 1 2
ACTING I
Introduction to practical skills necessary to art of stage acting.
Includes character and script analysis, development and techniques
for performance preparation, including relaxation, physical and vocal
warm ups, memorization techniques, rehearsal procedures, and handson
experience in the performance of monologues and/or scenes from
dramatic literature.
TPP 1111 3 1 2
ACTING II
• Prerequisite: TPP 1110
Further application of principles studied in Acting I. Includes
selection, rehearsal and performance of repertoire of contrasting
monologues, preparing résumé, auditioning techniques and behavior,
and public performance in scenes and/or in one-act plays. Focus is on
auditioning, acting as a career choice, and the “business” of acting.
TPP 1260 3 3 0
ACTING FOR THE CAMERA
• Prerequisite: TPP 1110
This course will help students transition from stage acting to acting for
the camera, and will cover basic camera acting techniques,
procedures, script analysis, and auditioning. Students will be required
to participate in exercises and/or film shoots outside of class time.
TPP 2190 1 - 3 variable
REHEARSAL AND PERFORMANCE I
• Prerequisite: By audition only
Participation in a major theatre production as a member of the cast.
(Lab involves 5-20 hours per week of rehearsals and/or performances.)
Multiple credit course. May be repeated for a maximum of 6 credits,
provided different topic explored each time, but grade forgiveness
cannot be applied.
TPP 2300 3 1 2
DIRECTING I
Examines the overall function of the director of a stage play. Includes
study of history and theory of directing, script analysis, the rehearsal
and pre-production process, and performance. Students direct scenes
and/or one-act plays for public performance.
TPP 2500 2 1 2
STAGE MOVEMENT FOR THE ACTOR
Focuses on developing the physical aspects of actor training with
emphasis on physical warm-ups, body language, control, use of space,
and character development.
TPP 2710 2 1 2
VOICE FOR THE ACTOR
A study of the principles of standard speech for the actor. The course
will consist of exercises designed to improve the student’s speaking
voice and vocal expressiveness. Areas of focus will include diction,
inflection, projection, tempo, and tone quality. The instructor will
assist students in analyzing their own vocal profiles and will provide
instruction and tools for individual improvement.
TPP 2732 3 3 0
STAGE DIALECTS
This course will prepare actors for dialect roles for stage and/or film. It
introduces a practical method for learning stage dialects which are
consistent, accurate, and natural.
TPP 2930 1 - 3 variable
SELECTED TOPICS IN THEATRE PERFORMANCE
Selected topics in theatre performance based on the needs and areas
of interest of the class and professor. May include laboratory and/or
field work as part of the class. Multiple credit course. May be repeated
for a maximum of 6 credits, provided different topic explored each
time, but grade forgiveness cannot be applied.
Course Cr Cls Lab Course Cr Cls Lab
Theatre and Entertainment Theatre and Entertainment
338
